
BANTAM BOOKS BY MAYA ANGELOU
ASK YOUR BOOKSELLER FOR THOSE
THAT YOU HAVE MISSED

I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

GATHER TOGETHER IN MY NAME

SINGIN’ AND SWINGIN’ AND GETTIN’ MERRY
LIKE CHRISTMAS

THE HEART OF A WOMAN

MAYA ANGELOU: POEMS

WOULDN’T TAKE NOTHING FOR
MY JOURNEY NOW

I SHALL NOT BE MOVED



EVEN THE STARS LOOK LONESOME



<§ 3 ©*

I KNOW WHY
THE CAGED
BIRD SINGS

— —

Maya Angelou



BANTAM BOOKS



New York Toronto London
Sydney Auckland




This edition contains the complete text
of the original hardcover edition.

NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED.

I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with
Random House, Inc.

PRINTING HISTORY
Random House edition published February 1970
Book-of-thc-Month Club edition published March 1970
Ebony Book Club edition published April 1970
A portion of this book appeared in ebony magazine April 1970
Bantam mass market edition / March 1971
Bantam trade edition / June 1997

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The title, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , is from the poem ’’Sympathy,”
by Paul Laurence Dunbar.

Lift Ev ry Voice and Sing, ’ words by James Weldon Johnson, music by J. Rosamond
Johnson, Copyright Edward B. Marks Music Corporation.

All rights reserved.

Copyright © 1969 by Maya Angelou.

Cover photograph copyright © 1997 by Dwight Carter.

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher.

For information address: Random House, Inc.,

201 East 50th Street, New York, N.Y. I0022f



If you purchased this book without a cover you should be aware that this book is
stolen property. It was reported as ‘’unsold and destroyed” to the publisher and nei-
ther the author nor the publisher has received any payment for this “stripped book.”

ISBN 0-553-3800 1 -X

Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada



This book is dedicated to
MY SON, GUY JOHNSON,
and all the strong
black birds of promise
who defy the odds and gods
and sing their songs



Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, a division of Random House, Inc. Its trade-
mark, consisting of the words ’ Bantam Books” and the portrayal of a rooster, is Registered in
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada. Bantam Books,
1540 Broadway, New York, New York 10036.



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA



579B864




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



I thank my mother, Vivian Baxter, and my brother, Bailey
Johnson, who encouraged me to remember. Thanks to the
Harlem Writers’ Guild for concern and to John O. Killens
who told me I could write. To Nana Kobina Nketsia IV who
insisted that I must. Lasting gratitude to Gerard Purcell who
believed concretely and to Tony D’ Amato who understood.
Thanks to Abbey Lincoln Roach for naming my book. A final
thanks to my editor at Random House, Robert Loomis, who
gently prodded me back into the lost years.




“What you looking at me for?

I didn’t come to stay . .

I hadn’t so much forgot as I couldn’t bring myself to
remember. Other things were more important.

“What you looking at me for?

I didn’t come to stay . . .”

Whether I could remember the rest of the poem or not was
immaterial. The truth of the statement was like a wadded-up
handkerchief, sopping wet in my fists, and the sooner they
accepted it the quicker I could let my hands open and the air
would cool my palms.

“What you looking at me for . . . ?”



The children’s section of the Colored Methodist Episcopal




2



3



MAYA ANGELOU

Church was wiggling and giggling over my well-known
forgetfulness.

The dress I wore was lavender taffeta, and each time I
breathed it rustled, and now that I was sucking in air to
breathe out shame it sounded like crepe paper on the back of
hearses.

As I’d watched Momma put ruffles on the hem and cute
little tucks around the waist, I knew that once I put it on I’d
look like a movie star. (It was silk and that made up for the
awful color.) I was going to look like one of the sweet little
white girls who were everybody’s dream of what was right
with the world. Hanging softly over the black Singer sewing
machine, it looked like magic, and when people saw me
wearing it they were going to run up to me and say, “Mar-
guerite [sometimes it was ‘dear Marguerite’], forgive us,
please, we didn’t know who you were,” and I would answer
generously, “No, you couldn’t have known. Of course I for-
give you.”

Just thinking about it made me go around with angel’s
dust sprinkled over my face for days. But Easter’s early
morning sun had shown the dress to be a plain ugly cut-down
from a white woman’s once-was-purple throwaway. It was
old-lady-long too, but it didn’t hide my skinny legs, which
had been greased with Blue Seal Vaseline and powdered with
the Arkansas red clay. The age-faded color made my skin
look dirty like mud, and everyone in church was looking at
my skinny legs.

Wouldn’t they be surprised when one day I woke out of
my black ugly dream, and my real hair, which was long and
blond, would take the place of the kinky mass that Momma
wouldn t let me straighten? My light-blue eyes were going to
hypnotize them, after all the things they said about “my daddy



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

must of been a Chinaman” (I thought they meant made out of
china, like a cup) because my eyes were so small and squinty.
Then they would understand why I had never picked up a
Southern accent, or spoke the common slang, and why I had
to be forced to eat pigs’ tails and snouts. Because I was really
white and because a cruel fairy stepmother, who was under-
standably jealous of my beauty, had turned me into a too-big
Negro girl, with nappy black hair, broad feet and a space
between her teeth that would hold a number-two pencil.

“What you looking . . .” The minister’s wife leaned
toward me, her long yellow face full of sorry. She whispered,
“I just come to tell you, it’s Easter Day.” I repeated, jamming
the words together, “Ijustcometotellyouit’sEasterDay,” as low
as possible. The giggles hung in the air like melting clouds
that were waiting to rain on me. I held up two fingers, close to
my chest, which meant that I had to go to the toilet, and tip-
toed toward the rear of the church. Dimly, somewhere over
my head, I heard ladies saying, “Lord bless the child,” and
“Praise God.” My head was up and my eyes were open, but I
didn’t see anything. Halfway down the aisle, the church
exploded with “Were you there when they crucified my
Lord?” and I tripped over a foot stuck out from the children’s
pew. I stumbled and started to say something, or maybe to
scream, but a green persimmon, or it could have been a lemon,
caught me between the legs and squeezed. I tasted the sour on
my tongue and felt it in the back of my mouth. Then before I
reached the door, the sting was burning down my legs and
into my Sunday socks. I tried to hold, to squeeze it back, to
keep it from speeding, but when I reached the church porch I
knew I’d have to let it go, or it would probably run right back
up to my head and my poor head would burst like a dropped
watermelon, and all the brains and spit and tongue and eyes




4



MAYA ANGELOU



would roll all over the place. So I ran down into the yard and
let it go. I ran, peeing and crying, not toward the toilet out
back but to our house. I’d get a whipping for it, to be sure, and
the nasty children would have something new to tease me
about. I laughed anyway, partially for the sweet release; still,
the greater joy came not only from being liberated from the
silly church but from the knowledge that I wouldn’t die from
a busted head.

If growing up is painful for the Southern Black girl, being
aware of her displacement is the rust on the razor that
threatens the throat.

It is an unnecessary insult.



CHAPTER 1






When I was three and Bailey four, we had arrived in
the musty litde town, wearing tags on our wrists which
instructed — “To Whom It May Concern” — that we were Mar-
guerite and Bailey Johnson Jr., from Long Beach, California, en
route to Stamps, Arkansas, c/o Mrs. Annie Henderson.

Our parents had decided to put an end to their calamitous
marriage, and Father shipped us home to his mother. A porter
had been charged with our welfare — he got off the train the
next day in Arizona — and our tickets were pinned to my
brother’s inside coat pocket.

I don’t remember much of the trip, but after we reached
the segregated southern part of the journey, things must have
looked up. Negro passengers, who always traveled with
loaded lunch boxes, felt sorry for “the poor little motherless
darlings” and plied us with cold fried chicken and potato
salad.

Years later I discovered that the United States had been
crossed thousands of times by frightened Black children trav-
eling alone to their newly affluent parents in Northern cities,




6



7



MAYA ANGELOU

or back to grandmothers in Southern towns when the urban
North reneged on its economic promises.

The town reacted to us as its inhabitants had reacted to all
things new before our coming. It regarded us a while without
curiosity but with caution, and after we were seen to be harm-
less (and children) it closed in around us, as a real mother
embraces a stranger’s child. Warmly, but not too familiarly.

We lived with our grandmother and uncle in the rear of
the Store (it was always spoken of with a capital s), which she
had owned some twenty-five years.

Early in the century, Momma (we soon stopped calling
her Grandmother) sold lunches to the sawmen in the lumber-
yard (east Stamps) and the seedmen at the cotton gin (west
Stamps). Her crisp meat pies and cool lemonade, when joined
to her miraculous ability to be in two places at the same time,
assured her business success. From being a mobile lunch
counter, she set up a stand between the two points of fiscal
interest and supplied the workers’ needs for a few years. Then
she had the Store built in the heart of the Negro area. Over the
years it became the lay center of activities in town. On Satur-
days, barbers sat their customers in the shade on the porch of
the Store, and troubadours on their ceaseless crawlings
through the South leaned across its benches and sang their sad
songs of The Brazos while they played juice harps and cigar-
box guitars.

The formal name of the Store was the Wm. Johnson Gen-
eral Merchandise Store. Customers could find food staples, a
good variety of colored thread, mash for hogs, corn for
chickens, coal oil for lamps, light bulbs for the wealthy, shoe-
strings, hair dressing, balloons, and flower seeds. Anything
not visible had only to be ordered.

Until we became familiar enough to belong to the Store



1 KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

and it to us, we were locked up in a Fun House of Things
where the attendant had gone home for life.

Each year I watched the field across from the Store turn
caterpillar green, then gradually frosty white. I knew exactly
how long it would be before the big wagons would pull into
the front yard and load on the cotton pickers at daybreak to
carry them to the remains of slavery’s plantations.

During the picking season my grandmother would get out
of bed at four o’clock (she never used an alarm clock) and
creak down to her knees and chant in a sleep-filled voice,
“Our Father, thank you for letting me see this New Day.
Thank you that you didn’t allow the bed I lay on last night to
be my cooling board, nor my blanket my winding sheet.
Guide my feet this day along the straight and narrow, and
help me to put a bridle on my tongue. Bless this house,
and everybody in it. Thank you, in the name of your Son,
Jesus Christ, Amen.”

Before she had quite arisen, she called our names and
issued orders, and pushed her large feet into homemade slip-
pers and across the bare lye-washed wooden floor to light the
coal-oil lamp.

The lamplight in the Store gave a soft make-believe
feeling to our world which made me want to whisper and
walk about on tiptoe. The odors of onions and oranges and
kerosene had been mixing all night and wouldn’t be disturbed
until the wooded slat was removed from the door and the
early morning air forced its way in with the bodies of people
who had walked miles to reach the pickup place.

“Sister, I’ll have two cans of sardines.”

“I’m gonna work so fast today I’m gonna make you look
like you standing still.”



1




8



MAYA ANGELOU



“Lemme have a hunk uh cheese and some sody crackers.” j

‘Just gimme a coupla them fat peanut paddies.” That j

would be from a picker who was taking his lunch. The greasy j

brown paper sack was stuck behind the bib of his overalls. j

He’d use the candy as a snack before the noon sun called the j

workers to rest.

In those tender mornings the Store was full of laughing,
joking, boasting and bragging. One man was going to pick
two hundred pounds of cotton, and another three hundred.

Even the children were promising to bring home fo’ bits and

six bits. j

The champion picker of the day before was the hero of the j

dawn. If he prophesied that the cotton in today’s field was

going to be sparse and stick to the bolls like glue, every listener

would grunt a hearty agreement. j

The sound of the empty cotton sacks dragging over the ’

floor and the murmurs of waking people were sliced by [

the cash register as we rang up the five-cent sales. I

If the morning sounds and smells were touched with the j

supernatural, the late afternoon had all the features of the j

normal Arkansas life. In the dying sunlight the people i

dragged, rather than their empty cotton sacks. j

Brought back to the Store, the pickers would step out of i

the backs of trucks and fold down, dirt-disappointed, to the !

ground. No matter how much they had picked, it wasn’t

enough. Their wages wouldn’t even get them out of debt to ;

my grandmother, not to mention the staggering bill that

waited on them at the white commissary downtown.

The sounds of the new morning had been replaced with j

grumbles about cheating houses, weighted scales, snakes, f

skimpy cotton and dusty rows. In later years I was to confront

the stereotyped picture of gay song-singing cotton pickers j

i

!



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



9



with such inordinate rage that I was told even by fellow
Blacks that my paranoia was embarrassing. But I had seen the
fingers cut by the mean little cotton bolls, and I had witnessed
the backs and shoulders and arms and legs resisting any fur-
ther demands.

Some of the workers would leave their sacks at the Store
to be picked up the following morning, but a few had to take
them home for repairs. I winced to picture them sewing the
coarse material under a coal-oil lamp with fingers stiffening
from the day’s work. In too few hours they would have to
walk back to Sister Henderson’s Store, get vittles and load,
again, onto the trucks. Then they would face another day of
trying to earn enough for the whole year with the heavy
knowledge that they were going to end the season as they
started it. Without the money or credit necessary to sustain a
family for three months. In cotton-picking time the late after-
noons revealed the harshness of Black Southern life, which in
the early morning had been softened by nature’s blessing of
grogginess, forgetfulness and the soft lamplight.





CHAPTER 2

■



t-

I



t'



f

[



When Bailey was six and I a year younger, we used to rattle
off the times tables with the speed I was later to see Chinese
children in San Francisco employ on their abacuses. Our
summer-gray pot-bellied stove bloomed rosy red during
winter, and became a severe disciplinarian threat if we were so
foolish as to indulge in making mistakes.

Uncle Willie used to sit, like a giant black Z (he had been
crippled as a child), and hear us testify to the Lafayette County
Training Schools’ abilities. His face pulled down on the left
side, as if a pulley had been attached to his lower teeth, and his
left hand was only a mite bigger than Bailey’s, but on the
second mistake or on the third hesitation his big overgrown
right hand would catch one of us behind the collar, and in the
same moment would thrust the culprit toward the dull red
heater, which throbbed like a devil’s toothache. We were
never burned, although once I might have been when I was so
terrified I tried to jump onto the stove to remove the possi-
bility of its remaining a threat. Like most children, I thought
if I could face the worst danger voluntarily, and triumph, I



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 11

would forever have power over it. But in my case of sacrificial
effort I was thwarted. Uncle Willie held tight to my dress and
I only got close enough to smell the clean dry scent of hot iron.
We learned the times tables without understanding their
grand principle, simply because we had the capacity and no
alternative.

The tragedy of lameness seems so unfair to children that
they are embarrassed in its presence. And they, most recently
off nature’s mold, sense that they have only narrowly missed
being another of her jokes. In relief at the narrow escape, they
vent their emotions in impatience and criticism of the unlucky
cripple.

Momma related times without end, and without any show
of emotion, how Uncle Willie had been dropped when he was
three years old by a woman who was minding him. She
seemed to hold no rancor against the baby-sitter, nor for her
just God who allowed the accident. She felt it necessary to
explain over and over again to those who knew the story by
heart that he wasn’t “born that way.”

In our society, where two-legged, two-armed strong Black
men were able at best to eke out only the necessities of life,
Uncle Willie, with his starched shirts, shined shoes and
shelves full of food, was the whipping boy and butt of jokes of
the underemployed and underpaid. Fate not only disabled
him but laid a double-tiered barrier in his path. He was also
proud and sensitive. Therefore he couldn’t pretend that he
wasn’t crippled, nor could he deceive himself that people were
not repelled by his defect.

Only once in all the years of trying not to watch him, I saw
him pretend to himself and others that he wasn’t lame.

Coming home from school one day, I saw a dark car in
our front yard. I rushed in to find a strange man and woman




12



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



13



(Uncle Willie said later they were schoolteachers from Little
Rock) drinking Dr. Pepper in the cool of the Store. I sensed a
wrongness around me, like an alarm clock that had gone off
without being set.

I knew it couldn’t be the strangers. Not frequently, but
often enough, travelers pulled off the main road to buy
tobacco or soft drinks in the only Negro store in Stamps.
When I looked at Uncle Willie, I knew what was pulling my
mind’s coattails. He was standing erect behind the counter,
not leaning forward or resting on the small shelf that had been
built for him. Erect. His eyes seemed to hold me with a mix-
ture of threats and appeal.

I dutifully greeted the strangers and roamed my eyes
around for his walking stick. It was nowhere to be seen. He
said, Uh . . . this this . . . this . . . uh, my niece. She’s . . . uh . . .
just come from school.” Then to the couple — “You know . . .
how, uh, children are . . . th-th-these days . . . they play all
d-d-day at school and c-c-can’t wait to get home and pl-play
some more.”

The people smiled, very friendly.

He added, “Go on out and pl-play, Sister.”

The lady laughed in a soft Arkansas voice and said, “Well,
you know, Mr. Johnson, they say, you’re only a child once.
Have you children of your own?”

Uncle Willie looked at me with an impatience I hadn’t
seen in his face even when he took thirty minutes to loop the
laces over his high-topped shoes. “I ... I thought I told you to
go ... go outside and play.”

Before I left I saw him lean back on the shelves of Garret
Snuff, Prince Albert and Spark Plug chewing tobacco.

“No, ma’am ... no ch-children and no wife.” He tried a



I laugh. “I have an old m-m-mother and my brother’s t-two

children to 1-look after.”

I didn’t mind his using us to make himself look good. In
fact, I would have pretended to be his daughter if he wanted
me to. Not only did I not feel any loyalty to my own father, I
figured that if I had been Uncle Willie’s child I would have
received much better treatment.

The couple left after a few minutes, and from the back of
the house I watched the red car scare chickens, raise dust and
disappear toward Magnolia.

Uncle Willie was making his way down the long shad-
owed aisle between the shelves and the counter — hand over
hand, like a man climbing out of a dream. I stayed quiet and
watched him lurch from one side, bumping to the other, until
he reached the coal-oil tank. He put his hand behind that dark
| recess and took his cane in the strong fist and shifted his

| weight on the wooden support. He thought he had pulled

I it off.

[ I’ll never know why it was important to him that the

jj couple (he said later that he’d never seen them before) would

| take a picture of a whole Mr. Johnson back to Little Rock.

He must have tired of being crippled, as prisoners tire of
penitentiary bars and the guilty tire of blame. The high-
! ' topped shoes and the cane, his uncontrollable muscles and

thick tongue, and the looks he suffered of either contempt or
pity had simply worn him out, and for one afternoon, one part
of an afternoon, he wanted no part of them.

I understood and felt closer to him at that moment than
ever before or since.

i

| During these years in Stamps, I met and fell in love with

I William Shakespeare. He was my first white love. Although I




14



MAYA ANGELOU



enjoyed and respected Kipling, Poe, Butler, Thackeray
and Henley, I saved my young and loyal passion for Paul
Lawrence Dunbar, Langston Hughes, James Weldon Johnson
and W.E.B. Du Bois “Litany at Atlanta.” But it was Shake-
speare who said, “When in disgrace with fortune and men’s
eyes. It was a state with which I felt myself most familiar. I
pacified myself about his whiteness by saying that after all he
had been dead so long it couldn’t matter to anyone any more.

Bailey and I decided to memorize a scene from The Mer-
chant of Venice, but we realized that Momma would question
us about the author and that we’d have to tell her that Shake-
speare was white, and it wouldn’t matter to her whether he
was dead or not. So we chose “The Creation” by James
Weldon Johnson instead.



C H APTE R 3






Weighing the half-pounds of flour, excluding the scoop, and
depositing them dust-free into the thin paper sacks held a
simple kind of adventure for me. I developed an eye for mea-
suring how full a silver-looking ladle of flour, mash, meal,
sugar or corn had to be to push the scale indicator over to eight
ounces or one pound. When I was absolutely accurate our
appreciative customers used to admire: “Sister Henderson
sure got some smart grandchildrens.” If I was off in the Store’s
favor, the eagle-eyed women would say, “Put some more in
that sack, child. Don’t you try to make your profit offa me.”

Then I would quietly but persistently punish myself. For
every bad judgment, the fine was no silver-wrapped Kisses,
the sweet chocolate drops that I loved more than anything in
the world, except Bailey. And maybe canned pineapples. My
obsession with pineapples nearly drove me mad. I dreamt of
the days when I would be grown and able to buy a whole
carton for myself alone.

Although the syrupy golden rings sat in their exotic cans
on our shelves year round, we only tasted them during




16



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



17



Christmas. Momma used the juice to make almost-black fruit
cakes. Then she lined heavy soot-encrusted iron skillets with
the pineapple rings for rich upside-down cakes. Bailey and I
received one slice each, and I carried mine around for hours,
shredding off the fruit until nothing was left except the per-
fume on my fingers. I’d like to think that my desire for
pineapples was so sacred that I wouldn’t allow myself to steal
a can (which was possible) and eat it alone out in the garden,
but I’m certain that I must have weighed the possibility of the
scent exposing me and didn’t have the nerve to attempt it.

Until I was thirteen and left Arkansas for good, the Store
was my favorite place to be. Alone and empty in the mornings,
it looked like an unopened present from a stranger. Opening
the front doors was pulling the ribbon off the unexpected gift.
The light would come in softly (we faced north), easing itself
over the shelves of mackerel, salmon, tobacco, thread. It fell
flat on the big vat of lard and by noontime during the summer
the grease had softened to a thick soup. Whenever I walked
into the Store in the afternoon, I sensed that it was tired. I
alone could hear the slow pulse of its job half done. But just
before bedtime, after numerous people had walked in and out,
had argued over their bills, or joked about their neighbors, or
just dropped in “to give Sister Henderson a ‘Hi y’all,’ ” the
promise of magic mornings returned to the Store and spread
itself over the family in washed life waves.

Momma opened boxes of crispy crackers and we sat
around the meat block at the rear of the Store. I sliced onions,
and Bailey opened two or even three cans of sardines and
allowed their juice of oil and fishing boats to ooze down and
around the sides. That was supper. In the evening, when we
were alone like that, Uncle Willie didn’t stutter or shake or
give any indication that he had an “affliction.” It seemed that



the peace of a day’s ending was an assurance that the covenant
God made with children, Negroes and the crippled was still in
effect.

Throwing scoops of corn to the chickens and mixing sour dry
mash with leftover food and oily dish water for the hogs were
among our evening chores. Bailey and I sloshed down twilight
trails to the pig pens, and standing on the first fence rungs we
poured down the unappealing concoctions to our grateful
hogs. They mashed their tender pink snouts down into the
slop, and rooted and grunted their satisfaction. We always
grunted a reply only half in jest. We were also grateful that we
had concluded the dirtiest of chores and had only gotten the
evil-smelling swill on our shoes, stockings, feet and hands.

Late one day, as we were attending to the pigs, I heard a
horse in the front yard (it really should have been called a
driveway, except that there was nothing to drive into it), and
ran to find out who had come riding up on a Thursday eve-
ning when even Mr. Steward, the quiet, bitter man who
owned a riding horse, would be resting by his warm fire until
the morning called him out to turn over his field.

The used-to-be sheriff sat rakishly astraddle his horse. His
nonchalance was meant to convey his authority and power
over even dumb animals. How much more capable he would
be with Negroes. It went without saying.

His twang jogged in the brittle air. From the side of the
Store, Bailey and I heard him say to Momma, “Annie, tell
Willie he better lay low tonight. A crazy nigger messed with a
white lady today. Some of the boys’ll be coming over here
later.” Even after the slow drag of years, I remember the sense




18



MAYA ANGELOU



of fear which filled my mouth with hot, dry air, and made my
body light.

The “boys”? Those cement faces and eyes of hate that
burned the clothes off you if they happened to see you
lounging on the main street downtown on Saturday. Boys? It
seemed that youth had never happened to them. Boys? No,
rather men who were covered with graves’ dust and age
without beauty or learning. The ugliness and rottenness of old
abominations.

If on Judgment Day I were summoned by St. Peter to give
testimony to the used-to-be sheriffs act of kindness, I would
be unable to say anything in his behalf. His confidence that my
uncle and every other Black man who heard of the Klan’s
coming ride would scurry under their houses to hide in
chicken droppings was too humiliating to hear. Without
waiting for Momma’s thanks, he rode out of the yard, sure
that things were as they should be and that he was a gentle
squire, saving those deserving serfs from the laws of the land,
which he condoned.

Immediately, while his horse’s hoofs were still loudly
thudding the ground, Momma blew out the coal-oil lamps.
She had a quiet, hard talk with Uncle Willie and called Bailey
and me into the Store.

We were told to take the potatoes and onions out of their
bins and knock out the dividing walls that kept them apart.
Then with a tedious and fearful slowness Uncle Willie gave
me his rubber-tipped cane and bent down to get into the now-
enlarged empty bin. It took forever before he lay down flat,
and then we covered him with potatoes and onions, layer
upon layer, like a casserole. Grandmother knelt praying in the
darkened Store.

It was fortunate that the boys didn’t ride into our yard



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



19



that evening and insist that Momma open the Store. They
would have surely found Uncle Willie and just as surely
lynched him. He moaned the whole night through as if he
had, in fact, been guilty of some heinous crime. The heavy
sounds pushed their way up out of the blanket of vegetables
and I pictured his mouth pulling down on the right side and
his saliva flowing into the eyes of new potatoes and waiting
there like dew drops for the warmth of morning.




KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



21



CHAPTER 4

<36?



What sets one Southern town apart from another, or from a
Northern town or hamlet, or city high-rise? The answer must
be the experience shared between the unknowing majority (it)
and the knowing minority (you). All of childhood’s unan-
swered questions must finally be passed back to the town and
answered there. Heroes and bogey men, values and dislikes,
are first encountered and labeled in that early environment. In
later years they change faces, places and maybe races, tactics,
intensities and goals, but beneath those penetrable masks they
wear forever the stocking-capped faces of childhood.

Mr. McElroy, who lived in the big rambling house next to
the Store, was very tall and broad, and although the years had
eaten away the flesh from his shoulders, they had not, at the
time of my knowing him, gotten to his high stomach, or his
hands or feet.

He was the only Negro I knew, except for the school prin-
cipal and the visiting teachers, who wore matching pants and
jackets. When I learned that men’s clothes were sold like that
and called suits, I remember thinking that somebody had been



very bright, for it made men look less manly, less threatening
and a little more like women.

Mr. McElroy never laughed, and seldom smiled, and to
his credit was the fact that he liked to talk to Uncle Willie. He
never went to church, which Bailey and I thought also proved
he was a very courageous person. How great it would be to
grow up like that, to be able to stare religion down, especially
living next door to a woman like Momma.

I watched him with the excitement of expecting him to do
anything at any time. I never tired of this, or became disap-
pointed or disenchanted with him, although from the perch of
age, I see him now as a very simple and uninteresting man
who sold patent medicine and tonics to the less sophisticated
people in towns (villages) surrounding the metropolis of
Stamps.

There seemed to be an understanding between Mr.
McElroy and Grandmother. This was obvious to us because
he never chased us off his land. In summer’s late sunshine I
often sat under the chinaberry tree in his yard, surrounded by
the bitter aroma of its fruit and lulled by the drone of flies that
fed on the berries. He sat in a slotted swing on his porch,
rocking in his brown three-piece, his wide Panama nodding
in time with the whir of insects.

One greeting a day was all that could be expected from
Mr. McElroy. After his “Good morning, child,” or “Good
afternoon, child,” he never said a word, even if I met him
again on the road in front of his house or down by the well, or
ran into him behind the house escaping in a game of hide-
and-seek.

He remained a mystery in my childhood. A man who
owned his land and the big many-windowed house with a




22



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



23



porch that clung to its sides all around the house. An indepen-
dent Black man. A near anachronism in Stamps.

Bailey was the greatest person in my world. And the fact
that he was my brother, my only brother, and I had no sisters
to share him with, was such good fortune that it made me
want to live a Christian life just to show God that I was
grateful. Where I was big, elbowy and grating, he was small,
graceful and smooth. When I was described by our playmates
as being shit color, he was lauded for his velvet-black skin. His
hair fell down in black curls, and my head was covered with
black steel wool. And yet he loved me.

When our elders said unkind things about my features
(my family was handsome to a point of pain for me), Bailey
would wink at me from across the room, and I knew that it
was a matter of time before he would take revenge. He would
allow the old ladies to finish wondering how on earth I came
about, then he would ask, in a voice like cooling bacon grease,

Oh Mizeriz Coleman, how is your son? I saw him the other
day, and he looked sick enough to die.”

Aghast, the ladies would ask, “Die? From what? He ain’t
sick.” i

And in a voice oilier than the one before, he’d answer with
a straight face, “From the Uglies.”

I would hold my laugh, bite my tongue, grit my teeth and
very seriously erase even the touch of a smile from my face.

Later, behind the house by the black-walnut tree, we’d laugh
and laugh and howl.

Bailey could count on very few punishments for his consis-
tendy outrageous behavior, for he was the pride of the Hen-
derson/Johnson family.

His movements, as he was later to describe those of an
acquaintance, were activated with oiled precision. He was also ■



able to find more hours in the day than I thought existed. He
finished chores, homework, read more books than I and
played the group games on the side of the hill with the best of
them. He could even pray out loud in church, and was apt at
stealing pickles from the barrel that sat under the fruit
counter and Uncle Willie’s nose.

Once when the Store was full of lunchtime customers, he
dipped the strainer, which we also used to sift weevils from
meal and flour, into the barrel and fished for two fat pickles.
He caught them and hooked the strainer onto the side of the
barrel where they dripped until he was ready for them. When
the last school bell rang, he picked the nearly dry pickles out
of the strainer, jammed them into his pockets and threw the
strainer behind the oranges. We ran out of the Store. It was
summer and his pants were short, so the pickle juice made
clean streams down his ashy legs, and he jumped with his
pockets full of loot and his eyes laughing a “How about that?”
He smelled like a vinegar barrel or a sour angel.

After our early chores were done, while Uncle Willie or
Momma minded the Store, we were free to play the children’s
games as long as we stayed within yelling distance. Playing
hide-and-seek, his voice was easily identified, singing, “Last
night, night before, twenty-four robbers at my door. Who all
is hid? Ask me to let them in, hit ’em in the head with a
rolling pin. Who all is hid?” In follow the leader, naturally he
was the one who created the most daring and interesting
things to do. And when he was on the tail of the pop the whip,
he would twirl off the end like a top, spinning, falling, laugh-
ing, finally stopping just before my heart beat its last, and then
he was back in the game, still laughing.

Of all the needs (there are none imaginary) a lonely child
has, the one that must be satisfied, if there is going to be hope



24



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



25



and a hope of wholeness, is the unshaking need for an unshak-
able God. My pretty Black brother was my Kingdom Come.

I N Stamps the custom was to can everything that could pos-
sibly be preserved. During the killing season, after the first
frost, all neighbors helped each other to slaughter hogs and
even the quiet, big-eyed cows if they had stopped giving milk.

The missionary ladies of the Christian Methodist Epis-
copal Church helped Momma prepare the pork for sausage.
They squeezed their fat arms elbow deep in the ground meat,
mixed it with gray nose-opening sage, pepper and salt, and
made tasty little samples for all obedient children who
brought wood for the slick black stove. The men chopped off
the larger pieces of meat and laid them in the smokehouse to
begin the curing process. They opened the knuckle of the
hams with their deadly-looking knives, took out a certain
round harmless bone (“it could make the meat go bad”) and
rubbed salt, coarse brown salt that looked like fine gravel, into
the flesh, and the blood popped to the surface.

Throughout the year, until the next frost, we took our
meals from the smokehouse, the little garden that lay cousin-
close to the Store and from the shelves of canned foods. There
were choices on the shelves that could set a hungry child’s
mouth to watering. Green beans, snapped always the right
length, collards, cabbage, juicy red tomato preserves that came
into their own on steaming buttered biscuits, and sausage,
beets, berries and every fruit grown in Arkansas.

But at least twice yearly Momma would feel that as chil-
dren we should have fresh meat included in our diets. We
were then given money — pennies, nickels and dimes en-
trusted to Bailey — and sent to town to buy liver. Since the
whites had refrigerators, their butchers bought the meat from



commercial slaughterhouses in Texarkana and sold it to the
wealthy even in the peak of summer.

Crossing the Black area of Stamps which in childhood’s
narrow measure seemed a whole word, we were obliged by
custom to stop and speak to every person we met, and Bailey
felt constrained to spend a few minutes playing with each
friend. There was a joy in going to town with money in our
pockets (Bailey’s pockets were as good as my own) and time
on our hands. But the pleasure fled when we reached the
white part of town. After we left Mr. Willie Williams’ Do
Drop Inn, the last stop before whitefolksville, we had to cross
the pond and adventure the railroad tracks. We were
explorers walking without weapons into man-eating animals’
territory.

In Stamps the segregation was so complete that most
Black children didn’t really, absolutely know what whites
looked like. Other than that they were different, to be
dreaded, and in that dread was included the hostility of the
powerless against the powerful, the poor against the rich, the
worker against the worked for and the ragged against the well
dressed.

I remember never believing that whites were really real.

Many women who worked in their kitchens traded at our
•Store, and when they carried their finished laundry back to
town they often set the big baskets down on our front porch to
pull a singular piece from the starched collection and show
either how graceful was their ironing hand or how rich and
opulent was the property of their employers.

I looked at the items that weren’t on display. I knew, for
instance, that white men wore shorts, as Uncle Willie did, and
that they had an opening for taking out their “things” and
peeing, and that white women’s breasts weren’t built into



26



MAYA ANGELOU



their dresses, as some people said, because I saw their
brassieres in the baskets. But I couldn’t force myself to think
of them as people. People were Mrs. LaGrone, Mrs. Hen-
dricks, Momma, Reverend Sneed, Lillie B, and Louise and
Rex. Whitefolks couldn’t be people because their feet were too
small, their skin too white and see-throughy, and they didn’t
walk on the balls of their feet the way people did — they
walked on their heels like horses.

People were those who lived on my side of town. I didn’t
like them all, or, in fact, any of them very much, but they were
people. These others, the strange pale creatures that lived
in their alien unlife, weren’t considered folks. They were
whitefolks.



CHAPTER 5






Thou shall not be dirty” and “Thou shall not be impudent”
were the two commandments of Grandmother Henderson
upon which hung our total salvation.

Each night in the bitterest winter we were forced to wash
faces, arms, necks, legs and feet before going to bed. She used
to add, with a smirk that unprofane people can’t control when
venturing into profanity, “and wash as far as possible, then
wash possible.”

We would go to the well and wash in the ice-cold, clear
water, grease our legs with the equally cold stiff Vaseline, then
•tiptoe into the house. We wiped the dust from our toes and
settled down for schoolwork, cornbread, clabbered milk,
prayers and bed, always in that order. Momma was famous
for pulling the quilts off after we had fallen asleep to examine
our feet. If they weren’t clean enough for her, she took the
switch (she kept one behind the bedroom door for emergen-
cies) and woke up the offender with a few aptly placed
burning reminders.

The area around the well at night was dark and slick, and



28 MAYA ANGELOU

boys told about how snakes love water, so that anyone who
had to draw water at night and then stand there alone and
wash knew that moccasins and ratders, puff adders and boa
constrictors were winding their way to the well and would
arrive just as the person washing got soap in her eyes. But
Momma convinced us that not only was cleanliness next to
Godliness, dirtiness was the inventor of misery.

The impudent child was detested by God and a shame to
its parents and could bring destruction to its house and line.
All adults had to be addressed as Mister, Missus, Miss, Auntie,
Cousin, Unk, Uncle, Buhbah, Sister, Brother and a thousand
other appellations indicating familial relationship and the
lowliness of the addressor.

Everyone I knew respected these customary laws, except
for the powhitetrash children.

Some families of powhitetrash lived on Momma’s farm
land behind the school. Sometimes a gaggle of them came to
the Store, filling the whole room, chasing out the air and even
changing the well-known scents. The children crawled over
the shelves and into the potato and onion bins, twanging all
the time in their sharp voices like cigar-box guitars. They took
liberties in my Store that I would never dare. Since Momma
told us that the less you say to white-folks (or even powhite-
trash) the better, Bailey and I would stand, solemn, quiet, in
the displaced air. But if one of the playful apparitions got close
to us, I pinched it. Partly out of angry frustration and partly
because I didn’t believe in its flesh reality.

They called my uncle by his first name and ordered him
around the Store. He, to my crying shame, obeyed them in his
limping dip-straight-dip fashion.

My grandmother, too, followed their orders, except that



1 KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 29

she didn’t seem to be servile because she anticipated their
needs.

“Here’s sugar, Miz Potter, and here’s baking powder. You
didn’t buy soda last month, you’ll probably be needing some.”

Momma always directed her statements to the adults, but
sometimes, Oh painful sometimes, the grimy, snotty-nosed
girls would answer her.

“Naw, Annie . . .” — to Momma? Who owned the land
they lived on? Who forgot more than they would ever learn?
If there was any justice in the world, God should strike them
dumb at once! — “Just give us some extry sody crackers, and
some more mackerel.”

At least they never looked in her face, or I never caught
them doing so. Nobody with a smidgen of training, not even
the worst roustabout, would look right in a grown person’s
face. It meant the person was trying to take the words out
before they were formed. The dirty little children didn’t do
that, but they threw their orders around the Store like lashes
from a cat-o’-nine-tails.

When I was around ten years old, those scruffy children
caused me the most painful and confusing experience I had
ever had with my grandmother.

One summer morning, after I had swept the dirt yard of
leaves, spearmint-gum wrappers and Vienna-sausage labels, I
raked the yellow-red dirt, and made half-moons carefully, so
that the design stood out clearly and mask-like. I put the rake
behind the Store and came through the back of the house to
find Grandmother on the front porch in her big, wide white
apron. The apron was so stiff by virtue of the starch that it
could have stood alone. Momma was admiring the yard, so I
joined her. It truly looked like a flat redhead that had been
raked with a big-toothed comb. Momma didn’t say anything



I



JU MAYA ANGELOU

but I knew she liked it. She looked over toward the school
principal’s house and to the right at Mr. McElroy’s. She was
hoping one of those community pillars would see the design
before the day s business wiped it out. Then she looked
upward to the school. My head had swung with hers, so at just
about the same time we saw a troop of the powhitetrash kids
marching over the hill and down by the side of the school.

I looked to Momma for direction. She did an excellent job
of sagging from her waist down, but from the waist up she
seemed to be pulling for the top of the oak tree across the road.
Then she began to moan a hymn. Maybe not to moan, but the
tune was so slow and the meter so strange that she could have
been moaning. She didn’t look at me again. When the chil-
dren reached halfway down the hill, halfway to the Store, she
said without turning, “Sister, go on inside.”

I wanted to beg her, “Momma, don’t wait for them. Come
on inside with me. If they come in the Store, you go to the
bedroom and let me wait on them. They only frighten me if
you’re around. Alone I know how to handle them.” But of
course I couldn’t say anything, so I went in and stood behind
the screen door.

Before the girls got to the porch I heard their laughter
crackling and popping like pine logs in a cooking stove. I sup-
pose my lifelong paranoia was born in those cold, molasses-
slow minutes. They came finally to stand on the ground in
front of Momma. At first they pretended seriousness. Then
one of them wrapped her right arm in the crook of her left,
pushed out her mouth and started to hum. I realized that she
was aping my grandmother. Another said, “Naw, Helen, you
ain’t standing like her. This here’s it.” Then she lifted her
chest, folded her arms and mocked that strange carriage that



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 31

was Annie Henderson. Another laughed, “Naw, you can’t do
it. Your mouth ain’t pooched out enough. It’s like this.”

I thought about the rifle behind the door, but I knew I’d
never be able to hold it straight, and the . 410 , our sawed-off
shotgun, which stayed loaded and was fired every New Year’s
night, was locked in the trunk and Uncle Willie had the key
on his chain. Through the fly-specked screen-door, I could see
that the arms of Momma’s apron jiggled from the vibrations
of her humming. But her knees seemed to have locked as if
they would never bend again.

She sang on. No louder than before, but no softer either.
No slower or faster.

The dirt of the girls’ cotton dresses continued on their
legs, feet, arms and faces to make them all of a piece. Their
greasy uncolored hair hung down, uncombed, with a grim
finality. I knelt to see them better, to remember them for all
time. The tears that had slipped down my dress left unsur-
prising dark spots, and made the front yard blurry and even
more unreal. The world had taken a deep breath and was
having doubts about continuing to revolve.

The girls had tired of mocking Momma and turned to
other means of agitation. One crossed her eyes, stuck her
thumbs in both sides of her mouth and said, “Look here,
Annie. Grandmother hummed on and the apron strings
trembled. I wanted to throw a handful of black pepper in
their faces, to throw lye on them, to scream that they were
dirty, scummy peckerwoods, but I knew I was as clearly
imprisoned behind the scene as the actors outside were con-
fined to their roles.

One of the smaller girls did a kind of puppet dance while
her fellow clowns laughed at her. But the tall one, who was
almost a woman, said something very quietly, which I




32



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



33



couldn’t hear. They all moved backward from the porch, still
watching Momma. For an awful second I thought they were
going to throw a rock at Momma, who seemed (except for the
apron strings) to have turned into stone herself. But the big
girl turned her back, bent down and put her hands flat on the
ground — she didn’t pick up anything. She simply shifted her
weight and did a hand stand.

Her dirty bare feet and long legs went straight for the sky.
Her dress fell down around her shoulders, and she had on no
drawers. The slick pubic hair made a brown triangle where
her legs came together. She hung in the vacuum of that lifeless
morning for only a few seconds, then wavered and tumbled.
The other girls clapped her on the back and slapped their
hands.

Momma changed her song to “Bread of Heaven, bread of
Heaven, feed me till I want no more.”

I found that I was praying too. How long could Momma
hold out? What new indignity would they think of to subject
her to? Would I be able to stay out of it? What would
Momma really like me to do?

Then they were moving out of the yard, on their way to
town. They bobbed their heads and shook their slack behinds
and turned, one at a time:

“ Bye, Annie.”

“ Bye, Annie.”

“ Bye, Annie.”

Momma never turned her head or unfolded her arms, but
she stopped singing and said, “ ’Bye, Miz Helen, ’bye, Miz
Ruth, ’bye, Miz Eloise.”

I burst. A firecracker July-the-Fourth burst. How could
Momma call them Miz? The mean nasty things. Why
couldn’t she have come inside the sweet, cool store when we



saw them breasting the hill? What did she prove? And then if
they were dirty, mean and impudent, why did Momma have
to call them Miz?

She stood another whole song through and then opened
the screen door to look down on me crying in rage. She looked
until I looked up. Her face was a brown moon that shone on
me. She was beautiful. Something had happened out there,
which I couldn’t completely understand, but I could see that
she was happy. Then she bent down and touched me as
mothers of the church “lay hands on the sick and afflicted”
and I quieted.

“Go wash your face, Sister.” And she went behind the
candy counter and hummed, “Glory, glory, hallelujah, when I
lay my burden down.”

I threw the well water on my face and used the weekday
handkerchief to blow my nose. Whatever the contest had been
out front, I knew Momma had won.

I took the rake back to the front yard. The smudged foot-
prints were easy to erase. I worked for a long time on my new
design and laid the rake behind the wash pot. When I came
back in the Store, I took Momma’s hand and we both walked
outside to look at the pattern.

It was a large heart with lots of hearts growing smaller
Inside, and piercing from the outside rim to the smallest heart
was an arrow. Momma said, “Sister, that’s right pretty.” Then
she turned back to the Store and resumed, “Glory, glory, hal-
lelujah, when I lay my burden down.”



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



35



CHAPTER 6





Reverend Howard Thomas was the presiding elder over a
district in Arkansas that included Stamps. Every three months
he visited our church, stayed at Momma’s over the Saturday
night and preached a loud passionate sermon on Sunday. He
collected the money that had been taken in over the preceding
months, heard reports from all the church groups and shook
hands with the adults and kissed all small children. Then he
went away. (I used to think that he went west to heaven, but
Momma straightened me out. He just went to Texarkana.)

Bailey and I hated him unreservedly. He was ugly, fat,
and he laughed like a hog with the colic. We were able to
make each other burst with giggling when we did imitations
of the thick-skinned preacher. Bailey was especially good at it.
He could imitate Reverend Thomas right in front of Uncle
Willie and never get caught because he did it soundlessly. He
puffed out his cheeks until they looked like wet brown stones,
and wobbled his head from side to side. Only he and I knew it,
but that was old Reverend Thomas to a tee.

His obesity, while disgusting, was not enough to incur the



intense hate that we felt for him. The fact that he never both-
ered to remember our names was insulting, but neither was
that slight, alone, enough to make us despise him. But the
crime that tipped the scale and made our hate not only just but
imperative was his actions at the dinner table. He ate the
biggest, brownest and best parts of the chicken at every
Sunday meal.

The only good thing about his visits was the fact that he
always arrived late on Saturday nights, after we had had
dinner. I often wondered if he tried to catch us at the table. I
believe so, for when he reached the front porch his little eyes
would glitter toward the empty dining room and his face
would fall with disappointment. Then immediately, a thin
curtain would fall over his features and he’d laugh a few
barks, “Uh, huh, uh, huh. Sister Henderson, just like a penny
with a hole in it, I always turn up.”

Right on cue every time, Momma would answer, “That’s
right, Elder Thomas, thank the blessed Jesus, come right in.”

He’d step in the front door and put down his Gladstone
(that s what he called it) and look around for Bailey and me.
Then he opened his awful arms and groaned, “Suffer little
children to come unto me, for such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.”

Bailey went to him each time with his hand stretched out,
ready for a manly handshake, but Reverend Thomas would
push away the hand and encircle my brother for a few sec-
onds. “You still a boy, buddy. Remember that. They tell me
th e Good Book say, ‘When I was a child I spake as a child, I
thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away
childish things. Only then would he open his arms and
release Bailey.

I never had the nerve to go up to him. I was quite afraid



36



37



MAYA ANGELOU

that if I tried to say, “Hello, Reverend Thomas,” I would
choke on the sin of mocking him. After all, the Bible did say,
“God is not mocked,” and the man was God’s representative.
He used to say to me, “Come on, little sister. Come and get
this blessing.” But I was so afraid and I also hated him so
much that my emotions mixed themselves up and it was
enough to start me crying. Momma told him time after time,
“Don’t pay her no mind, Elder Thomas, you know how
tender-hearted she is.”

He ate the leftovers from our dinner and he and Uncle
Willie discussed the developments of the church programs.
They talked about how the present minister was attending to
his flock, who got married, who died and how many children
had been born since his last visit.

Bailey and I stood like shadows in the rear of the Store
near the coal-oil tank, waiting for the juicy parts. But when
they were ready to talk about the latest scandal, Momma sent
us to her bedroom with warnings to have our Sunday School
lesson perfectly memorized or we knew what we could
expect.

We had a system that never failed. I would sit in the big
rocking chair by the stove and rock occasionally and stamp my
feet. I changed voices, now soft and girlish, then a little deeper
like Bailey’s. Meanwhile, he would creep back into the Store.
Many times he came flying back to sit on the bed and to hold
the open lesson book just before Momma suddenly filled the
doorway.

“You children get your lesson good, now. You know all
the other children looks up to you all.” Then, as she turned
back into the Store Bailey followed right on her footsteps to
crouch in the shadows and listen for the forbidden gossip.

Once, he heard how Mr. Coley Washington had a girl



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

from Lewisville staying in his house. I didn’t think that was so
bad, but Bailey explained that Mr. Washington was probably
“doing it” to her. He said that although “it” was bad just about
everybody in the world did it to somebody, but no one else
was supposed to know that. And once, we found out about a
man who had been killed by whitefolks and thrown into the
pond. Bailey said the man’s things had been cut off and put in
his pocket and he had been shot in the head, all because the
whitefolks said he did “it” to a white woman.

Because of the kinds of news we filched from those
hushed conversations, I was convinced that whenever Rev-
erend Thomas came and Momma sent us to the back room
they were going to discuss whitefolks and “doing it.” Two
subjects about which I was very dim.

On Sunday mornings Momma served a breakfast that was
geared to hold us quiet from 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. She fried thick
pink slabs of home-cured ham and poured the grease over
sliced red tomatoes. Eggs over easy, fried potatoes and onions,
yellow hominy and crisp perch fried so hard we would pop
them in our mouths and chew bones, fins and all. Her cathead
biscuits were at least three inches in diameter and two inches
thick. The trick to eating catheads was to get the butter on
them before they got cold — then they were delicious. When,
unluckily, they were allowed to get cold, they tended to a
gooeyness, not unlike a wad of tired gum.

We were able to reaffirm our findings on the catheads
each Sunday that Reverend Thomas spent with us. Naturally
enough, he was asked to bless the table. We would all stand;
my uncle, leaning his walking stick against the wall, would
lean his weight on the table. Then Reverend Thomas would
begin. “Blessed Father, we thank you this morning . . .” and
on and on and on. I’d stop listening after a while until Bailey



38



39



MAYA ANGELOU

kicked me and then I cracked my lids to see what had
promised to be a meal that would make any Sunday proud.
But as the Reverend droned on and on and on to a God who I
thought must be bored to hear the same things over and over
again, I saw that the ham grease had turned white on the
tomatoes. The eggs had withdrawn from the edge of the
platter to bunch in the center like children left out in the cold.
And the catheads had sat down on themselves with the con-
clusiveness of a fat woman sitting in an easy chair. And still he
talked on. When he finally stopped, our appetites were gone,
but he feasted on the cold food with a non-talking but still
noisy relish.

In the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church the chil-
dren s section was on the right, cater-cornered from the pew
that held those ominous women called the Mothers of the
Church. In the young people’s section the benches were placed
close together, and when a child’s legs no longer comfortably
fitted in the narrow space, it was an indication to the elders
that that person could now move into the intermediate area
(center church). Bailey and I were allowed to sit with the other
children only when there were informal meetings, church
socials or the like. But on the Sundays when Reverend
Thomas preached, it was ordained that we occupy the first
row, called the mourners bench. I thought we were placed in
front because Momma was proud of us, but Bailey assured me
that she just wanted to keep her grandchildren under her
thumb and eye.

Reverend Thomas took his text from Deuteronomy. And
I was stretched between loathing his voice and wanting to
listen to the sermon. Deuteronomy was my favorite book in
the Bible. The laws were so absolute, so clearly set down, that
I knew if a person truly wanted to avoid hell and brimstone,



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

and being roasted forever in the devil’s fire, all she had to do
was memorize Deuteronomy and follow its teaching, word
for word. I also liked the way the word rolled off the tongue.

Bailey and I sat alone on the front bench, the wooden slats
pressing hard on our behinds and the backs of our thighs. I
would have wriggled just a bit, but each time I looked over at
Momma, she seemed to threaten, “Move and I’ll tear you up,”
so, obedient to the unvoiced command, I sat still. The church
ladies were warming up behind me with a few hallelujahs and
Praise the Lords and Amens, and the preacher hadn’t really
moved into the meat of the sermon.

It was going to be a hot service.

On my way into church, I saw Sister Monroe, her open-
faced gold crown glinting when she opened her mouth to
return a neighborly greeting. She lived in the country and
couldn’t get to church every Sunday, so she made up for her
absences by shouting so hard when she did make it that she
shook the whole church. As soon as she took her seat, all the
ushers would move to her side of the church because it took
three women and sometimes a man or two to hold her.

Once when she hadn’t been to church for a few months
(she had taken off to have a child), she got the spirit and
started shouting, throwing her arms around and jerking her
body, so that the ushers went over to hold her down, but she
tore herself away from them and ran up to the pulpit. She
stood in front of the altar, shaking like a freshly caught trout.
She screamed at Reverend Taylor. “Preach it. I say, preach it.”
Naturally he kept on preaching as if she wasn’t standing there
telling him what to do. Then she screamed an extremely fierce
I said, preach it and stepped up on the altar. The Reverend
kept on throwing out phrases like home-run balls and Sister
Monroe made a quick break and grasped for him. For just a



40



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



41



second, everything and everyone in the church except Rev-
erend Taylor and Sister Monroe hung loose like stockings on
a wash-line. Then she caught the minister by the sleeve of his
jacket and his coattail, then she rocked him from side to side.

I have to say this for our minister, he never stopped giving
us the lesson. The usher board made its way to the pulpit,
going up both aisles with a little more haste than is custom-
arily seen in church. Truth to tell, they fairly ran to the min-
ister’s aid. Then two of the deacons, in their shiny Sunday
suits, joined the ladies in white on the pulpit, and each time
they pried Sister Monroe loose from the preacher he took
another deep breath and kept on preaching, and Sister
Monroe grabbed him in another place, and more firmly. Rev-
erend Taylor was helping his rescuers as much as possible by
jumping around when he got a chance. His voice at one point
got so low it sounded like a roll of thunder, then Sister
Monroe’s “Preach it” cut through the roar, and we all won-
dered (I did, in any case) if it would ever end. Would they go
on forever, or get tired out at last like a game of blindman’s
bluff that lasted too long, with nobody caring who was “it”?

I’ll never know what might have happened, because magi-
cally the pandemonium spread. The spirit infused Deacon
Jackson and Sister Willson, the chairman of the usher board,
at the same time. Deacon Jackson, a tall, thin, quiet man, who
was also a part-time Sunday school teacher, gave a scream like
a falling tree, leaned back on thin air and punched Reverend
Taylor on the arm. It must have hurt as much as it caught the
Reverend unawares. There was a moment’s break in the
rolling sounds and Reverend Taylor jerked around surprised,
and hauled off and punched Deacon Jackson. In the same
second Sister Willson caught his tie, looped it over her fist a
few times, and pressed down on him. There wasn’t time to



laugh or cry before all three of them were down on the floor
behind the altar. Their legs spiked out like kindling wood.

Sister Monroe, who had been the cause of all the excite-
ment, walked off the dais, cool and spent, and raised her flinty
voice in the hymn, “I came to Jesus, as I was, worried, wound
and sad, I found in Him a resting place and He has made me
glad.”

The minister took advantage of already being on the floor
and asked in a choky little voice if the church would kneel
with him to offer a prayer of thanksgiving. He said we had
been visited with a mighty spirit, and let the whole church
say Amen.

On the next Sunday, he took his text from the eighteenth
chapter of the Gospel according to St. Luke, and talked qui-
etly but seriously about the Pharisees, who prayed in the
streets so that the public would be impressed with their reli-
gious devotion. I doubt that anyone got the message —
certainly not those to whom it was directed. The deacon
board, however, did appropriate funds for him to buy a new
suit. The other was a total loss.

Our presiding elder had heard the story of Reverend
Taylor and Sister Monroe, but I was sure he didn’t know her
by sight. So my interest in the service’s potential and my aver-
sion to Reverend Thomas caused me to turn him off. Turning
off or tuning out people was my highly developed art. The
custom of letting obedient children be seen but not heard was
so agreeable to me that I went one step further: Obedient chil-
dren should not see or hear if they chose not to do so. I laid a
handful of attention on my face and tuned up the sounds in
the church.

Sister Monroe’s fuse was already lit, and she sizzled some-
where to the right behind me. Elder Thomas jumped into the



42



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



43



sermon, determined, I suppose, to give the members what
they came for. I saw the ushers from the left side of the church
near the big windows begin to move discreetly, like pall-
bearers, toward Sister Monroe s bench. Bailey jogged my
knee. When the incident with Sister Monroe, which we
always called simply the incident,” had taken place, we had
been too astounded to laugh. But for weeks after, all we
needed to send us into violent outbursts of laughter was a
whispered Preach it.” Anyway, he pushed my knee, covered
his mouth and whispered, “I say, preach it.”

I looked toward Momma, across that square of stained
boards, over the collection table, hoping that a look from her
would root me safely to my sanity. But for the first time in
memory Momma was staring behind me at Sister Monroe. I
supposed that she was counting on bringing that emotional
lady up short with a severe look or two. But Sister Monroe’s
voice had already reached the danger point. “Preach it!”

There were a few smothered giggles from the children’s
section, and Bailey nudged me again. “I say, preach it” — in a
whisper. Sister Monroe echoed him loudly, “I say, preach it!”

Two deacons wedged themselves around Brother Jackson
as a preventive measure and two large determined-looking
men walked down the aisle toward Sister Monroe.

While the sounds in the church were increasing, Elder
Thomas made the regrettable mistake of increasing his
volume too. Then suddenly, like a summer rain, Sister ;

Monroe broke through the cloud of people trying to hem her
in, and flooded up to the pulpit. She didn’t stop this time but
continued immediately to the altar, bound for Elder Thomas,
crying “I say, preach it.”

Bailey said out loud, “Hot dog” and “Damn” and “She’s
going to beat his butt.”



But Reverend Thomas didn’t intend to wait for that even-
tuality, so as Sister Monroe approached the pulpit from the
right he started descending from the left. He was not intimi-
dated by his change of venue. He continued preaching and
moving. He finally stopped right in front of the collection
table, which put him almost in our laps, and Sister Monroe
rounded the altar on his heels, followed by the deacons,
ushers, some unofficial members and a few of the bigger
children.

Just as the elder opened his mouth, pink tongue waving,
and said, “Great God of Mount Nebo,” Sister Monroe hit him
on the back of his head with her purse. Twice. Before he could
bring his lips together, his teeth fell, no, actually his teeth
jumped, out of his mouth.

The grinning uppers and lowers lay by my right shoe,
looking empty and at the same time appearing to contain all
the emptiness in the world. I could have stretched out a foot
and kicked them under the bench or behind the collection
table.

Sister Monroe was struggling with his coat, and the men
had all but picked her up to remove her from the building.
Bailey pinched me and said without moving his lips, “I’d like
to see him eat dinner now.”

I looked at Reverend Thomas desperately. If he appeared
just a little sad or embarrassed, I could feel sorry for him and
wouldn’t be able to laugh. My sympathy for him would keep
me from laughing. I dreaded laughing in church. If I lost con-
trol, two things were certain to happen. I would surely pee,
and just as surely get a whipping. And this time I would
probably die because everything was funny — Sister Monroe,
and Momma trying to keep her quiet with those threatening




44



MAYA ANGELOU



1 KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



45



looks, and Bailey whispering “Preach it” and Elder Thomas
with his lips flapping loose like tired elastic.

But Reverend Thomas shrugged off Sister Monroe’s
weakening clutch, pulled out an extra-large white hand-
kerchief and spread it over his nasty little teeth. Putting them
in his pocket, he gummed, “Naked I came into the world, and
naked I shall go out.”

Bailey’s laugh had worked its way up through his body
and was escaping through his nose in short hoarse snorts. I
didn’t try any longer to hold back the laugh, I just opened my
mouth and released sound. I heard the first titter jump up in
the air over my head, over the pulpit and out the window.
Momma said out loud, “Sister!” but the bench was greasy and
I slid off onto the floor. There was more laughter in me trying
to get out. I didn’t know there was that much in the whole
world. It pressed at all my body openings, forcing everything
in its path. I cried and hollered, passed gas and urine. I didn’t
see Bailey descend to the floor, but I rolled over once and he
was kicking and screaming too. Each time we looked at each
other we howled louder than before, and though he tried to
say something, the laughter attacked him and he was only able
to get out I say, preach.” And then I rolled over onto Uncle
Willie’s rubber-tipped cane. My eyes followed the cane up to
his good brown hand on the curve and up the long, long white
sleeve to his face. The one side pulled down as it usually did
when he cried (it also pulled down when he laughed). He stut-
tered, “I’m gonna whip you this time myself.”

I have no memory of how we got out of church and into
the parsonage next door, but in that overstuffed parlor, Bailey
and I received the whipping of our lives. Uncle Willie ordered
us between licks to stop crying. I tried to, but Bailey refused to
cooperate. Later he explained that when a person is beating



you you should scream as loud as possible; maybe the whipper
will become embarrassed or else some sympathetic soul might
come to your rescue. Our savior came for neither of these rea-
sons, but because Bailey yelled so loud and disturbed what was
left of the service, the minister’s wife came out and asked
Uncle Willie to quiet us down.

Laughter so easily turns to hysteria for imaginative chil-
dren. I felt for weeks after that I had been very, very sick, and
until I completely recovered my strength I stood on laughter’s
cliff and any funny thing could hurl me off to my death far
below.

Each time Bailey said “Preach it” to me, I hit him as hard
as I could and cried.



i KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



47



CHAPTER 7





Momma had married three times: Mr. Johnson, my grand-
father, who left her around the turn of the century with two
small sons to raise; Mr. Henderson, of whom I know nothing
at all (Momma never answered questions directly put to her
on any subject except religion); then finally Mr. Murphy. I saw
him a fleeting once. He came through Stamps on a Saturday
night, and Grandmother gave me the chore of making his
pallet on the floor. He was a stocky dark man who wore a
snap-brim hat like George Raft. The next morning he hung
around the Store until we returned from church. That
marked the first Sunday I knew Uncle Willie to miss services.
Bailey said he stayed home to keep Mr. Murphy from stealing
us blind. He left in the middle of the afternoon after one of
Momma’s extensive Sunday dinners. His hat pushed back off
his forehead, he walked down the road whistling. I watched
his thick back until he turned the bend by the big white
church.

People spoke of Momma as a good-looking woman and
some, who remembered her youth, said she used to be right



pretty. I saw only her power and strength. She was taller than
any woman in my personal world, and her hands were so
large they could span my head from ear to ear. Her voice was
soft only because she chose to keep it so. In church, when she
was called upon to sing, she seemed to pull out plugs from
behind her jaws and the huge, almost rough sound would
pour over the listeners and throb in the air.

Each Sunday, after she had taken her seat, the minister
would announce, “We will now be led in a hymn by Sister
Henderson. And each Sunday she looked up with amaze-
ment at the preacher and asked silently, “Me?” After a second
of assuring herself that she indeed was being called upon, she
laid down her handbag and slowly folded her handkerchief.
This was placed neatly on top of the purse, then she leaned on
the bench in front and pushed herself to a standing position,
and then she opened her mouth and the song jumped out as if
it had only been waiting for the right time to make an appear-
ance. Week after week and year after year the performance
never changed, yet I don’t remember anyone’s ever remarking
on her sincerity or readiness to sing.

Momma intended to teach Bailey and me to use the paths
of life that she and her generation and all the Negroes gone
before had found, and found to be safe ones. She didn’t cotton
-to the idea that whitefolks could be talked to at all without
risking one’s life. And certainly they couldn’t be spoken to
insolently. In fact, even in their absence they could not be
spoken of too harshly unless we used the sobriquet “They.” If
she had been asked and had chosen to answer the question of
whether she was cowardly or not, she would have said that she
was a realist. Didn’t she stand up to “them” year after year?
Wasn’t she the only Negro woman in Stamps referred to once
as Mrs.?



48



MAYA ANGELOU



That incident became one of Stamps’ little legends. Some
years before Bailey and I arrived in town, a man was hunted
down for assaulting white womanhood. In trying to escape he
ran to the Store. Momma and Uncle Willie hid him behind
the chifforobe until night, gave him supplies for an overland
journey and sent him on his way. He was, however, appre-
hended, and in court when he was questioned as to his move-
ments on the day of the crime, he replied that after he heard
that he was being sought he took refuge in Mrs. Henderson’s
Store.

The judge asked that Mrs. Henderson be subpoenaed, and
when Momma arrived and said she was Mrs. Henderson, the
judge, the bailiff and other whites in the audience laughed.
The judge had really made a gaffe calling a Negro woman
Mrs., but then he was from Pine Bluff and couldn’t have been
expected to know that a woman who owned a store in that vil-
lage would also turn out to be colored. The whites tickled
their funny bones with the incident for a long time, and the
Negroes thought it proved the worth and majesty of my
grandmother.



CHAPTER 8

'ssae&f



Stamps, Arkansas, was Chitlin’ Switch, Georgia; Hang ’Em
High, Alabama; Don’t Let the Sun Set on You Here, Nigger,
Mississippi; or any other name just as descriptive. People in
Stamps used to say that the whites in our town were so preju-
diced that a Negro couldn’t buy vanilla ice cream. Except on
July Fourth. Other days he had to be satisfied with chocolate.

A light shade had been pulled down between the Black
community and all things white, but one could see through it
enough to develop a fear-admiration-contempt for the white
“things” — white folks’ cars and white glistening houses and
their children and their women. But above all, their wealth
that allowed them to waste was the most enviable. They had
so many clothes they were able to give perfectly good dresses,
worn just under the arms, to the sewing class at our school for
the larger girls to practice on.

Although there was always generosity in the Negro neigh-
borhood, it was indulged on pain of sacrifice. Whatever was
given by Black people to other Blacks was most probably



50



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



51



I



needed as desperately by the donor as by the receiver. A fact
which made the giving or receiving a rich exchange.

I couldn’t understand whites and where they got the
right to spend money so lavishly. Of course, I knew God was
white too, but no one could have made me believe he was
prejudiced. My grandmother had more money than all the
powhitetrash. We owned land and houses, but each day Bailey
and I were cautioned, “Waste not, want not.”

Momma bought two bolts of cloth each year for winter
and summer clothes. She made my school dresses, underslips,
bloomers, handkerchiefs, Bailey’s shirts, shorts, her aprons,
house dresses and waists from the rolls shipped to Stamps by
Sears and Roebuck. Uncle Willie was the only person in the
family who wore ready-to-wear clothes all the time. Each day,
he wore fresh white shirts and flowered suspenders, and his
special shoes cost twenty dollars. I thought Uncle Willie sin-
fully vain, especially when I had to iron seven stiff starched
shirts and not leave a cat’s face anywhere.

During the summer we went barefoot, except on Sunday,
and we learned to resole our shoes when they “gave out,” as
Momma used to say. The Depression must have hit the white
section of Stamps with cyclonic impact, but it seeped into the
Black area slowly, like a thief with misgivings. The country
had been in the throes of the Depression for two years before
the Negroes in Stamps knew it. I think that everyone thought
that the Depression, like everything else, was for the white-
folks, so it had nothing to do with them. Our people had lived
off the land and counted on cotton-picking and hoeing and
chopping seasons to bring in the cash needed to buy shoes,
clothes, books and light farm equipment. It was when the
owners of cotton fields dropped the payment of ten cents for a
pound of cotton to eight, seven and finally five that the Negro



community realized that the Depression, at least, did not
discriminate.

Welfare agencies gave food to the poor families, Black and
white. Gallons of lard, flour, salt, powdered eggs and pow-
dered milk. People stopped trying to raise hogs because it was
too difficult to get slop rich enough to feed them, and no one
had the money to buy mash or fish meal.

Momma spent many nights figuring on our tablets, slowly.
She was trying to find a way to keep her business going,
although her customers had no money. When she came to her
conclusions, she said, “Bailey, I want you to make me a nice
clear sign. Nice and neat. And Sister, you can color it with
your Crayolas. I want it to say:

1 5 LB. CAN OF POWDERED MILK IS WORTH 50 (£ IN TRADE

1 5 LB. CAN OF POWDERED EGGS IS WORTH $ 1.00 IN TRADE

10 #2 CANS OF MACKEREL IS WORTH $ 1.00 IN TRADE.”

And so on. Momma kept her store going. Our customers
didn’t even have to take their slated provisions home. They’d
pick them up from the welfare center downtown and drop
them off at the Store. If they didn’t want an exchange at the
moment they’d put down in one of the big gray ledgers the
amount of credit coming to them. We were among the few
Negro families not on relief, but Bailey and I were the only
children in the town proper that we knew who ate powdered
eggs every day and drank the powdered milk.

Our playmates’ families exchanged their unwanted food
for sugar, coal oil, spices, potted meat, Vienna sausage, peanut
butter, soda crackers, toilet soap and even laundry soap. We
were always given enough to eat, but we both hated the lumpy
milk and mushy eggs, and sometimes we’d stop off at the



fc.




52



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



53



house of one of the poorer families to get some peanut butter
and crackers. Stamps was as slow coming out of the Depres-
sion as it had been getting into it. World War II was well
along before there was a noticeable change in the economy of
that near-forgotten hamlet.

ONE Christmas we received gifts from our mother and father,
who lived separately in a heaven called California, where we
were told they could have all the oranges they could eat. And
the sun shone all the time. I was sure that wasn’t so. I couldn’t
believe that our mother would laugh and eat oranges in the
sunshine without her children. Until that Christmas when we
received the gifts I had been confident that they were both
dead. I could cry anytime I wanted by picturing my mother (I
didn’t quite know what she looked like) lying in her coffin.
Her hair, which was black, was spread out on a tiny litde
white pillow and her body was covered with a sheet. The
face was brown, like a big O, and since I couldn’t fill in the
features I printed mother across the O, and tears would
fall down my cheeks like warm milk.

Then came that terrible Christmas with its awful presents
when our father, with the vanity I was to find typical, sent his
photograph. My gift from Mother was a tea set — a teapot,
four cups and saucers and tiny spoons — and a doll with blue
eyes and rosy cheeks and yellow hair painted on her head. I
didn t know what Bailey received, but after I opened my
boxes I went out to the backyard behind the chinaberry tree.
The day was cold and the air as clear as water. Frost was still
on the bench but I sat down and cried. I looked up and Bailey
was coming from the outhouse, wiping his eyes. He had been
crying too. I didn’t know if he had also told himself they were
dead and had been rudely awakened to the truth or whether



he was just feeling lonely. The gifts opened the door to ques-
tions that neither of us wanted to ask. Why did they send us
away? and What did we do so wrong? So Wrong? Why, at
three and four, did we have tags put on our arms to be sent
by train alone from Long Beach, California, to Stamps,
Arkansas, with only the porter to look after us? (Besides, he
got off in Arizona.)

Bailey sat down beside me, and that time didn’t admonish
me not to cry. So I wept and he sniffed a little, but we didn’t
talk until Momma called us back in the house.

Momma stood in front of the tree that we had decorated
with silver ropes and pretty colored balls and said, “You chil-
dren is the most ungrateful things I ever did see. You think
your momma and poppa went to all the trouble to send you
these nice play pretties to make you go out in the cold and
cryr

Neither of us said a word. Momma continued, “Sister, I
know you tender-hearted, but Bailey Junior, there’s no reason
for you to set out mewing like a pussy cat, just ’cause you got
something from Vivian and Big Bailey.” When we still didn’t
force ourselves to answer, she asked, “You want me to tell
Santa Claus to take these things back?” A wretched feeling of
being torn engulfed me. I wanted to scream, “Yes. Tell him to
take them back.” But I didn’t move.

Later Bailey and I talked. He said if the things really did
come from Mother maybe it meant that she was getting ready
to come and get us. Maybe she had just been angry at some-
thing we had done, but was forgiving us and would send for
us soon. Bailey and I tore the stuffing out of the doll the day
after Christmas, but he warned me that I had to keep the tea
set in good condition because any day or night she might come
riding up.




I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



55



CHAPTER 9

saesr



A year later our father came to Stamps without warning. It
was awful for Bailey and me to encounter the reality one
abrupt morning. We, or at any rate I, had built such elaborate
fantasies about him and the illusory mother that seeing him in
the flesh shredded my inventions like a hard yank on a paper
chain. He arrived in front of the Store in a clean gray car (he
must have stopped just outside of town to wipe it in prepara-
tion for the grand entrance”). Bailey, who knew such things,
said it was a De Soto. His bigness shocked me. His shoulders
were so wide I thought he d have trouble getting in the door.
He was taller than anyone I had seen, and if he wasn’t fat,
which I knew he wasn t, then he was fat-like. His clothes were
too small too. They were tighter and woolier than was cus-
tomary in Stamps. And he was blindingly handsome. Momma
cried, “Bailey, my baby. Great God, Bailey.” And Uncle
Willie stuttered, “Bu-Buh-Bailey.” My brother said, “Hot dog
and damn. It s him. It’s our daddy.” And my seven-year-old
world humpty-dumptied, never to be put back together again.

His voice rang like a metal dipper hitting a bucket and he



spoke English. Proper English, like the school principal, and
even better. Our father sprinkled ers and even errers in his sen-
tences as liberally as he gave out his twisted-mouth smiles. His
lips pulled not down, like Uncle Willie’s, but to the side, and
his head lay on one side or the other, but never straight on the
end of his neck. He had the air of a man who did not believe
what he heard or what he himself was saying. He was the first
cynic I had met. So er this is Daddy’s er little man? Boy, any-
body tell you errer that you er look like me?” He had Bailey in
one arm and me in the other. “And IDaddy’s baby girl. You’ve
errer been good children, er haven’t you? Or er I guess I
would have er heard about it er from Santa Claus.” I was so
proud of him it was hard to wait for the gossip to get around
that he was in town. Wouldn’t the kids be surprised at how
handsome our daddy was? And that he loved us enough to
come down to Stamps to visit? Everyone could tell from the
way he talked and from the car and clothes that he was rich
and maybe had a castle out in California. (I later learned that
he had been a doorman at Santa Monica’s plush Breakers
Hotel.) Then the possibility of being compared with him
occurred to me, and I didn’t want anyone to see him. Maybe
he wasn’t my real father. Bailey was his son, true enough, but I
was an orphan that they picked up to provide Bailey with
company.

I was always afraid when I found him watching me, and
wished I could grow small like Tiny Tim. Sitting at the table
one day, I held the fork in my left hand and pierced a piece of
fried chicken. I put the knife through the second tine, as we
had been strictly taught, and began to saw against the bone.
My father laughed a rich rolling laugh, and I looked up. He
imitated me, both elbows going up and down. “Is Daddy’s
baby going to fly away?” Momma laughed, and Uncle Willie



56



MAYA ANG ELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



57



too, and even Bailey snickered a little. Our father was proud
of his sense of humor.

For three weeks the Store was filled with people who had
gone to school with him or heard about him. The curious and
envious milled around and he strutted, throwing ers and errers
all over the place and under the sad eyes of Uncle Willie.
Then one day he said he had to get back to California. I was
relieved. My world was going to be emptier and dryer, but the
agony of having him intrude into every private second would
be gone. And the silent threat that had hung in the air since
his arrival, the threat of his leaving someday, would be gone. I
wouldn’t have to wonder whether I loved him or not, or have
to answer “Does Daddy’s baby want to go to California with
Daddy?” Bailey had told him that he wanted to go, but I had
kept quiet. Momma was relieved too, although she had had a
good time cooking special things for him and showing her
California son off to the peasants of Arkansas. But Uncle
Willie was suffering under our father’s bombastic pressure,
and in mother-bird fashion Momma was more concerned
with her crippled offspring than the one who could fly away
from the nest.

He was going to take us with him! The knowledge
buzzed through my days and made me jump unexpectedly
like a jack-in-the-box. Each day I found some time to walk to
the pond where people went to catch sun perch and striped
bass. The hours I chose to go were too early or late for fisher-
men, so I had the area to myself. I stood on the bank of the
green dark water, and my thoughts skidded like the water
spiders. Now this way, now that, now the other. Should I go
with my father? Should I throw myself into the pond, and not
being able to swim, join the body of L.C., the boy who had
drowned last summer? Should I beg Momma to let me stay



with her? I could tell her that I’d take over Bailey’s chores and
do my own as well. Did I have the nerve to try life without
Bailey? I couldn’t decide on any move, so I recited a few Bible
verses, and went home.

Momma cut down a few give-aways that had been traded
to her by white women’s maids and sat long nights in the
dining room sewing jumpers and skirts for me. She looked
pretty sad, but each time I found her watching me she’d say, as
if I had already disobeyed, “You be a good girl now. You
hear? Don’t you make people think I didn’t raise you right.
You hear?” She would have been more surprised than I had
she taken me in her arms and wept at losing me. Her world
was bordered on all sides with work, duty, religion and “her
place.” I don’t think she ever knew that a deep-brooding love
hung over everything she touched. In later years I asked her if
she loved me and she brushed me off with: “God is love. Just
worry about whether you’re being a good girl, then He will
love you.”

I sat in the back of the car, with Dad’s leather suitcases,
and our cardboard boxes. Although the windows were rolled
down, the smell of fried chicken and sweet potatoe pie lay
unmoving, and there wasn’t enough room to stretch. When-
ever he thought about it, Dad asked, “Are you comfortable
hack there, Daddy’s baby?” He never waited to hear my
answer, which was “Yes, sir,” before he’d resume his conver-
sation with Bailey. He and Bailey told jokes, and Bailey
laughed all the time, put out Dad’s cigarettes and held one
hand on the steering wheel when Dad said, “Come on, boy,
help me drive this thing.”

After I got tired of passing through the same towns over
and over, and seeing the empty-looking houses, small and
unfriendly, I closed myself off to everything but the kissing



58



59



MAYA ANGELOU

sounds of the tires on the pavement and the steady moan of
the motor. I was certainly very vexed with Bailey. There was
no doubt that he was trying to butter up Dad; he even started
to laugh like him, a Santa Claus, Jr., with his “Ho, ho, ho.”
“How are you going to feel seeing your mother? Going to
be happy?” he was asking Bailey, but it penetrated the foam I
had packed around my senses. Were we going to see Her? I
thought we were going to California. I was suddenly terrified.
Suppose she laughed at us the way he did? What if she had
other children now, whom she kept with her? I said, “I want
to go back to Stamps.” Dad laughed, “You mean Daddy’s
baby doesn’t want to go to St. Louis to see her mother? She’s
not going to eat you up, you know.”

He turned to Bailey and I looked at the side of his face; he
was so unreal to me I felt as if I were watching a doll talk.
“Bailey, Junior, ask your sister why she wants to go back to
Stamps.” He sounded more like a white man than a Negro.
Maybe he was the only brown-skinned white man in the
world. It would be just my luck that the only one would turn
out to be my father. But Bailey was quiet for the first time
since we left Stamps. I guess he was thinking too about seeing
Mother. How could an eight-year-old contain that much fear?
He swallows and holds it behind his tonsils, he tightens his
feet and closes the fear between his toes, he contracts his but-
tock and pushes it up behind the prostate gland.

Junior, cat’s got your tongue? What do you think your
mother will say, when I tell her her children didn’t want to see
her?” The thought that he would tell her shook me and Bailey
at the same time. He leaned over the back of the seat — “My,
it’s Mother Dear. You know you want to see Mother Dear.
Don’t cry.” Dad laughed and pitched in his seat and asked
himself, I guess, “What will she say to that?”



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

I stopped crying since there was no chance to get back to
Stamps and Momma. Bailey wasn’t going to back me up, I
could tell, so I decided to shut up and dry up and wait for
whatever seeing Mother Dear was going to bring.

St. Louis was a new kind of hot and a new kind of dirty.
My memory had no pictures of the crowded-together soot-
covered buildings. For all I knew, we were being driven to
Hell and our father was the delivering devil.

Only in strict emergencies did Bailey allow me to speak
Pig Latin to him in front of adults, but I had to take the
chance that afternoon. We had spun around the same corner, I
was sure, about fifty times. I asked Bailey, “Ooday ooyay ink-
thay isthay is our atherfay, or ooday ooyay inkthay atthay
eeway are eeingbay idkay appednay?” Bailey said, “My, we’re
in St. Louis, and we’re going to see Mother Dear. Don’t
worry. Dad chuckled and said, “Oohay oodway antway
ootay idkay appnay ooyay? Ooday ooyay inkthay ooyay are
indlay ergbay ildrenchay?” I thought that my brother and his
friends had created Pig Latin. Hearing my father speak it
didn’t startle me so much as it angered. It was simply another
case of the trickiness of adults where children were concerned.
Another case in point of the Grownups’ Betrayal.

To describe my mother would be to write about a hurri-
cane in its perfect power. Or the climbing, falling colors of a
rainbow. We had been received by her mother and had waited
on the edge of our seats in the overfurnished living room (Dad
talked easily with our grandmother, as whitefolks talk to
Blacks, unembarrassed and unapologetic). Wh were both
fearful of Mother’s coming and impatient at her delay. It is
remarkable how much truth there is in the two expressions:
struck dumb and love at first sight.” My mother’s beauty
literally assailed me. Her red lips (Momma said it was a sin to



60



MAYA ANGELOU



wear lipstick) split to show even white teeth and her fresh-
butter color looked see-through clean. Her smile widened her
mouth beyond her cheeks beyond her ears and seemingly
through the walls to the street outside. I was struck dumb. I
knew immediately why she had sent me away. She was too
beautiful to have children. I had never seen a woman as pretty
as she who was called “Mother.” Bailey on his part fell
instantly and forever in love. I saw his eyes shining like hers;
he had forgotten the loneliness and the nights when we had
cried together because we were “unwanted children.” He had
never left her warm side or shared the icy wind of solitude
with me. She was his Mother Dear and I resigned myself to
his condition. They were more alike than she and I, or even he
and I. They both had physical beauty and personality, so I fig-
ured it figured.

Our father left St. Louis a few days later for California,
and I was neither glad nor sorry. He was a stranger, and if he
chose to leave us with a stranger, it was all of one piece.



CHAPTER 1 O






Grandmother Baxter was a quadroon or an octoroon, or in
any case she was nearly white. She had been raised by a
German family in Cairo, Illinois, and had come to St. Louis at
the turn of the century to study nursing. While she was
working at Homer G. Phillips Hospital she met and married
Grandfather Baxter. She was white (having no features that
could even loosely be called Negroid) and he was Black.
While she spoke with a throaty German accent until her
death, he had the choppy spouting speech of the West Indians.

Their marriage was a happy one. Grandfather had a
-famous saying that caused great pride in his family: “Bah
Jesus, I live for my wife, my children and my dog.” He took
extreme care to prove that statement true by taking the word
of his family even in the face of contradictory evidence.

The Negro section of St. Louis in the mid-thirties had all
the finesse of a gold-rush town. Prohibition, gambling and
their related vocations were so obviously practiced that it was
hard for me to believe that they were against the law. Bailey
and I, as newcomers, were quickly told by our schoolmates



oz MAYA ANGELOU

who the men on the street corners were as we passed. I was
sure that they had taken their names from Wild West Books
(Hard-hitting Jimmy, Two Gun, Sweet Man, Poker Pete),
and to prove me right, they hung around in front of saloons
like unhorsed cowboys.

We met the numbers runners, gamblers, lottery takers
and whiskey salesmen not only in the loud streets but in our
orderly living room as well. They were often there when we
returned from school, sitting with hats in their hands, as we
had done upon our arrival in the big city. They waited silently
for Grandmother Baxter.

Her white skin and the pince-nez that she dramatically
took from her nose and let hang free on a chain pinned to her
dress were factors that brought her a great deal of respect.
Moreover, the reputation of her six mean children and the fact
that she was a precinct captain compounded her power and
gave her the leverage to deal with even the lowest crook
without fear . She had pull with the police department, so the
men in their flashy suits and fleshy scars sat with churchlike
decorum and waited to ask favors from her. If Grandmother
raised the heat off their gambling parlors, or said the word
that reduced the bail of a friend waiting in jail, they knew
what would be expected of them. Come election, they were to
bring in the votes from their neighborhood. She most often
got them leniency, and they always brought in the vote.

St. Louis also introduced me to thin-sliced ham (I thought
it a delicacy), jelly beans and peanuts mixed, lettuce on sand-
wich bread, Victrolas and family loyalty. In Arkansas, where
we cured our own meat, we ate half-inch slabs of ham for
breakfast, but in St. Louis we bought the paper-thin slices in a
strange-smelling German store and ate them in sandwiches. If
Grandmother never lost her German accent, she also never



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 63

lost her taste for the thick black German Brot, which we
bought unsliced. In Stamps, lettuce was used only to make a
bed for potato salad or slaw, and peanuts were brought in raw
from the field and roasted in the bottom of the oven on cold
nights. The rich scents used to fill the house and we were
always expected to eat too many. But that was a Stamps
custom. In St. Louis, peanuts were bought in paper bags and
mixed with jelly beans, which meant that we ate the salt and
sugar together and I found them a delicious treat. The best
thing the big town had to offer.

When we enrolled in Toussaint L’Ouverture Grammar
School, we were struck by the ignorance of our schoolmates
and the rudeness of our teachers. Only the vastness of the
building impressed us; not even the white school in Stamps
was as large.

The students, however, were shockingly backward. Bailey
and I did arithmetic at a mature level because of our work in
the Store, and we read well because in Stamps there wasn’t
anything else to do. We were moved up a grade because our
teachers thought that we country children would make our
classmates feel inferior — and we did. Bailey would not refrain
from remarking on our classmates’ lack of knowledge. At
lunchtime in the large gray concrete playground, he would
'Stand in the center of a crowd of big boys and ask, “Who was
Napoleon Bonaparte?” “How many feet make a mile?” It was
infighting, Bailey style.

Any of the boys might have been able to beat him with
their fists, but if they did, they’d just have had to do it again
the next day, and Bailey never held a brief for fighting fair. He
taught me that once I got into a fight I should “grab for the
balls right away.” He never answered when I asked, “Suppose
I’m fighting a girl?”



64



MAYA ANGELOU



We went to school there a full year, but all I remember
hearing that I hadn’t heard before was, “Making thousands of
egg-shaped oughts will improve penmanship.”

The teachers were more formal than those we knew in
Stamps, and although they didn’t whip their students with
switches, they gave them licks in the palms of their hands with
rulers. In Stamps teachers were much friendlier, but that was
because they were imported from the Arkansas Negro col-
leges, and since we had no hotels or rooming houses in town,
they had to live with private families. If a lady teacher took
company, or didn’t receive any mail or cried alone in her room
at night, by the weeks’ end even the children discussed her
morality, her loneliness and her other failings generally. It
would have been near impossible to maintain formality under
a small town’s invasions of privacy.

St. Louis teachers, on the other hand, tended to act
very siditty, and talked down to their students from the
lofty heights of education and whitefolks’ enunciation. They,
women as well as men, all sounded like my father with their
ers and errers. They walked with their knees together and
talked through tight lips as if they were as afraid to let the
sound out as they were to inhale the dirty air that the listener
gave off.



We walked to school around walls of bricks and breathed
the coal dust for one discouraging winter. We learned to say
Yes and “No” rather than “Yes, ma’am,” and “No, ma’am.”
Occasionally Mother, whom we seldom saw in the house,
had us meet her at Louie’s. It was a long dark tavern at the
end of the bridge near our school, and was owned by two
Syrian brothers.



We used to come in the back door, and the sawdust, stale
beer, steam and boiling meat made me feel as if I’d been



1 KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



65



eating mothballs. Mother had cut my hair in a bob like hers
and straightened it, so my head felt skinned and the back of
my neck so bare that I was ashamed to have anyone walk up
behind me. Naturally, this kept me turning quickly as if I
expected something to happen.

At Louie’s we were greeted by Mother’s friends as
Bibbie s darling babies” and were given soft drinks and
boiled shrimp. While we sat on the stiff wooden booths,
Mother would dance alone in front of us to music from the
Seeburg. I loved her most at those times. She was like a pretty
kite that floated just above my head. If I liked, I could pull it
in to me by saying I had to go to the toilet or by starting a fight
with Bailey. I never did either, but the power made me tender
to her.

The Syrian brothers vied for her attention as she sang the
heavy blues that Bailey and I almost understood. They
watched her, even when directing their conversation to other
customers, and I knew they too were hypnotized by this beau-
tiful lady who talked with her whole body and snapped her
fingers louder than anyone in the whole world. We learned
the Time Step at Louie’s. It is from this basic step that most
American Black dances are born. It is a series of taps, jumps
and rests, and demands careful listening, feeling and coordi-
nation. We were brought before Mother’s friends, there in the
heavy saloon air, to show our artistry. Bailey learned easily,
and has always been the better dancer. But I learned too. I
approached the Time Step with the same determination to
win that I had approached the time tables with. There was no
Uncle Willie or sizzling pot-bellied stove, but there was
Mother and her laughing friends, and they amounted to the
same thing. We were applauded and given more soft drinks




66



67



MAYA ANGELOU

and more shrimp, but it was to be years later before I found
the joy and freedom of dancing well.

Mother’s brothers, Uncles Tutti, Tom and Ira, were well-
known young men about St. Louis. They all had city jobs,
which I now understand to have been no mean feat for Negro
men. Their jobs and their family set them apart, but they were
best known for their unrelenting meanness. Grandfather had
told them, “Bah Jesus, if you ever get in jail for stealing or
some such foolishness, I’ll let you rot. But if you’re arrested for
fighting, I’ll sell the house, lock, stock and barrel, to get you
out!” With that kind of encouragement, backed by explosive
tempers, it was no wonder they became fearsome characters.
Our youngest uncle, Billy, was not old enough to join in their
didoes. One of their more flamboyant escapades has become a
proud family legend.

Pat Patterson, a big man, who was himself protected by
the shield of a bad reputation, made the mistake of cursing my
mother one night when she was out alone. She reported the
incident to her brothers. They ordered one of their hangers-on
to search the streets for Patterson, and when he was located, to
telephone them.

As they waited throughout the afternoon, the living room
filled with smoke and the murmurs of plans. From time to
time, Grandfather came in from the kitchen and said, “Don’t
kill him. Mind you, just don’t kill him,” then went back to his
coffee with Grandmother.

They went to the saloon where Patterson sat drinking at a
small table. Uncle Tommy stood by the door, Uncle Tutti sta-
tioned himself at the toilet door and Uncle Ira, who was the
oldest and maybe everyone’s ideal, walked over to Patterson.
They were all obviously carrying guns.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

Uncle Ira said to my mother, “Here, Bibbi. Here’s this
nigger Patterson. Come over here and beat his ass.”

She crashed the man’s head with a policeman’s billy
enough to leave him just this side of death. There was no
police investigation nor social reprobation.

After all, didn’t Grandfather champion their wild tem-
pers, and wasn’t Grandmother a near-white woman with
police pull?

I admit that I was thrilled by their meanness. They beat
up whites and Blacks with the same abandon, and liked each
other so much that they never needed to learn the art of
making outside friends. My mother was the only warm, out-
going personality among her siblings. Grandfather became
bedridden during our stay there, and his children spent their
free time telling him jokes, gossiping with him and showing
their love.

Uncle Tommy, who was gruff and chewed his words like
Grandfather, was my favorite. He strung ordinary sentences
together and they came out sounding either like the most pro-
fane curses or like comical poetry. A natural comedian, he
never waited for the laugh that he knew must follow his droll
statements. He was never cruel. He was mean.

When we played handball on the side of our house, Uncle
'Tommy would turn the corner, coming from work. He
would pretend at first not to see us, but with the deftness of a
cat he would catch the ball and say, “Put your minds where
your behinds are, and I’ll let you on my team.” We children
would range around him, but it was only when he reached the
steps that he’d wind up his arm and throw the ball over the
light post and toward the stars.

He told me often, “Ritie, don’t worry ’cause you ain’t
pretty. Plenty pretty women I seen digging ditches or worse.



1.



68



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



69



You smart. I swear to God, I rather you have a good mind
than a cute behind.”

They bragged often about the binding quality of the
Baxter blood. Uncle Tommy said that even the children felt it
before they were old enough to be taught. They reminisced
over Bailey s teaching me to walk when he was less than three.
Displeased at my stumbling motions, he was supposed to have
said, This is my sister. / have to teach her to walk.” They also
told me how I got the name “My.” After Bailey learned defi-
nitely that I was his sister, he refused to call me Marguerite,
but rather addressed me each time as “Mya Sister,” and in
later more articulate years, after the need for brevity had
shortened the appellation to “My,” it was elaborated into
“Maya.”

We lived in a big house on Caroline Street with our
grandparents for half the year before Mother moved us in
with her. Moving from the house where the family was cen-
tered meant absolutely nothing to me. It was simply a small
pattern in the grand design of our lives. If other children
didn t move so much, it just went to show that our lives were
fated to be different from everyone else’s in the world. The
new house was no stranger than the other, except that we
were with Mother.

Bailey persisted in calling her Mother Dear until the cir-
cumstance of proximity softened the phrase’s formality to
“Muh Dear,” and finally to “M’Deah.” I could never put
my finger on her realness. She was so pretty and so quick
that even when she had just awakened, her eyes full of sleep
and hair tousled, I thought she looked just like the Virgin
Mary. But what mother and daughter understand each
other, or even have the sympathy for each other’s lack of
understanding?



Mother had prepared a place for us, and we went to it
gratefully. We each had a room with a two-sheeted bed,
plenty to eat and store-bought clothes to wear. And after all,
she didn t have to do it. If we got on her nerves or if we were
disobedient, she could always send us back to Stamps. The
weight of appreciation and the threat, which was never
spoken, of a return to Momma were burdens that clogged my
childish wits into impassivity. I was called Old Lady and
chided for moving and talking like winter’s molasses.

Mother’s boyfriend, Mr. Freeman, lived with us, or we
lived with him (I never quite knew which). He was a South-
erner, too, and big. But a little flabby. His breasts used to
embarrass me when he walked around in his undershirt.
They lay on his chest like flat titties.

Even if Mother hadn’t been such a pretty woman, light-
skinned with straight hair, he was lucky to get her, and he
knew it. She was educated, from a well-known family, and
after all, wasn t she born in St. Louis? Then she was gay. She
laughed all the time and made jokes. He was grateful. I think
he must have been many years older than she, but if not, he
had the sluggish inferiority of old men married to younger
women. He watched her every move and when she left the
room, his eyes allowed her reluctantly to go.




I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



71



CHAPTER 11





I had decided that St. Louis was a foreign country. I would
never get used to the scurrying sounds of flushing toilets, or
the packaged foods, or doorbells or the noise of cars and trains
and buses that crashed through the walls or slipped under the
doors. In my mind I only stayed in St. Louis for a few weeks.
As quickly as I understood that I had not reached my home, I
sneaked away to Robin Hood’s forest and the caves of Alley
Oop where all reality was unreal and even that changed every
day. I carried the same shield that I had used in Stamps: “I
didn’t come to stay.”

Mother was competent in providing for us. Even if that
meant getting someone else to furnish the provisions.
Although she was a nurse, she never worked at her profession
while we were with her. Mr. Freeman brought in the necessi-
ties and she earned extra money cutting poker games in gam-
bling parlors. The straight eight-to-five world simply didn’t
have enough glamor for her, and it was twenty years later that
I first saw her in a nurse’s uniform.

Mr. Freeman was a foreman in the Southern Pacific yards



and came home late sometimes, after Mother had gone out.
He took his dinner off the stove where she had carefully cov-
ered it and which she had admonished us not to bother. He
ate quietly in the kitchen while Bailey and I read separately
and greedily our own Street and Smith pulp magazine. Now
that we had spending money, we bought the illustrated paper-
backs with their gaudy pictures. When Mother was away, we
were put on an honor system. We had to finish our home-
work, eat dinner and wash the dishes before we could read or
listen to The Lone Ranger, Crime Busters or The Shadow.

Mr. Freeman moved gracefully, like a big brown bear,
and seldom spoke to us. He simply waited for Mother and put
his whole self into the waiting. He never read the paper or
patted his foot to radio. He waited. That was all.

If she came home before we went to bed, we saw the man
come alive. He would start out of the big chair, like a man
coming out of sleep, smiling. I would remember then that a
few seconds before, I had heard a car door slam; then Mother’s
footsteps would signal from the concrete walk. When her key
rattled the door, Mr. Freeman would have already asked his
habitual question, “Hey, Bibbi, have a good time?”

His query would hang in the air while she sprang over to
peck him on the lips. Then she turned to Bailey and me with
-the lipstick kisses. “Haven’t you finished your homework?”
If we had and were just reading — “O.K., say your prayers
and go to bed.” If we hadn’t — “Then go to your room and
finish . . . then say your prayers and go to bed.”

Mr. Freeman’s smile never grew, it stayed at the same
intensity. Sometimes Mother would go over and sit on his lap
and the grin on his face looked as if it would stay there
forever.

From our rooms we could hear the glasses clink and the




72



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



73



radio turned up. I think she must have danced for him on the
good nights, because he couldn’t dance, but before I fell asleep
I often heard feet shuffling to dance rhythms.

I felt very sorry for Mr. Freeman. I felt as sorry for him as I
had felt for a litter of helpless pigs born in our backyard sty in
Arkansas. We fattened the pigs all year long for the slaughter
on the first good frost, and even as I suffered for the cute little
wiggly things, I knew how much I was going to enjoy the fresh
sausage and hog’s headcheese they could give me only with
their deaths.

Because of the lurid tales we read and our vivid imagina-
tions and, probably, memories of our brief but hectic lives,
Bailey and I were afflicted — he physically and I mentally. He
stuttered, and I sweated through horrifying nightmares. He
was constantly told to slow down and start again, and on my
particularly bad nights my mother would take me in to sleep
with her, in the large bed with Mr. Freeman.

Because of a need for stability, children easily become
creatures of habit. After the third time in Mother’s bed, I
thought there was nothing strange about sleeping there.

One morning she got out of bed for an early errand, and I
fell asleep again. But I awoke to a pressure, a strange feeling
on my left leg. It was too soft to be a hand, and it wasn’t the
touch of clothes. Whatever it was, I hadn’t encountered the
sensation in all the years of sleeping with Momma. It didn’t
move, and I was too startled to. I turned my head a little to the
left to see if Mr. Freeman was awake and gone, but his eyes
were open and both hands were above the cover. I knew, as if
I had always known, it was his “thing” on my leg.

He said, “Just stay right here, Ritie, I ain’t gonna hurt
you. I wasn’t afraid, a little apprehensive, maybe, but not
afraid. Of course I knew that lots of people did “it” and they



used their “things” to accomplish the deed, but no one I knew
had ever done it to anybody. Mr. Freeman pulled me to him,
and put his hand between my legs. He didn’t hurt, but
Momma had drilled into my head: “Keep your legs closed,
and don’t let nobody see your pocketbook.”

“Now, I didn’t hurt you. Don’t get scared.” He threw
back the blankets and his “thing” stood up like a brown ear of
corn. He took my hand and said, “Feel it.” It was mushy and
squirmy like the inside of a freshly killed chicken. Then he
dragged me on top of his chest with his left arm, and his right
hand was moving so fast and his heart was beating so hard
that I was afraid that he would die. Ghost stories revealed
how people who died wouldn’t let go of whatever they were
holding. I wondered if Mr. Freeman died holding me how I
would ever get free. Would they have to break his arms to get
me loose?

Finally he was quiet, and then came the nice part. He held
me so softly that I wished he wouldn’t ever let me go. I felt at
home. From the way he was holding me I knew he’d never let
me go or let anything bad ever happen to me. This was
probably my real father and we had found each other at last.
But then he rolled over, leaving me in a wet place and stood up.

“I gotta talk to you, Ritie.” He pulled off his shorts that
had fallen to his ankles, and went into the bathroom.

It was true the bed was wet, but I knew I hadn’t had an
accident. Maybe Mr. Freeman had one while he was holding
me. He came back with a glass of water and told me in a sour
voice, “Get up. You peed in the bed.” He poured water on the
wet spot, and it did look like my mattress on many mornings.

Having lived in Southern strictness, I knew when to keep
quiet around adults, but I did want to ask him why he said I
peed when I was sure he didn’t believe that. If he thought I



I



74



75



MAYA ANGELOU

was naughty, would that mean that he would never hold me
again? Or admit that he was my father? I had made him
ashamed of me.

“Ritie, you love Bailey?” He sat down on the bed and I
came close, hoping. “Yes.” He was bending down, pulling on
his socks, and his back was so large and friendly I wanted to
rest my head on it.

“If you ever tell anybody what we did, I’ll have to kill
Bailey.”

What had we done? We? Obviously he didn’t mean my
peeing in the bed. I didn’t understand and didn’t dare ask
him. It had something to do with his holding me. But there
was no chance to ask Bailey either, because that would be
telling what we had done. The thought that he might kill
Bailey stunned me. After he left the room I thought about
telling Mother that I hadn’t peed in the bed, but then if she
asked me what happened I’d have to tell her about Mr.
Freeman holding me, and that wouldn’t do.

It was the same old quandary. I had always lived it. There
was an army of adults, whose motives and movements I just
couldn’t understand and who made no effort to understand
mine. There was never any question of my disliking Mr.
Freeman, I simply didn’t understand him either.

For weeks after, he said nothing to me, except the gruff
hellos which were given without ever looking in my direction.

This was the first secret I had ever kept from Bailey and
sometimes I thought he should be able to read it on my face,
but he noticed nothing.

I began to feel lonely for Mr. Freeman and the encasement
of his big arms. Before, my world had been Bailey, food,
Momma, the Store, reading books and Uncle Willie. Now, for
the first time, it included physical contact.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

I began to wait for Mr. Freeman to come in from the
yards, but when he did, he never noticed me, although I put a
lot of feeling into “Good evening, Mr. Freeman.”

One evening, when I couldn’t concentrate on anything, I
went over to him and sat quickly on his lap. He had been
waiting for Mother again. Bailey was listening to The Shadow
and didn’t miss me. At first Mr. Freeman sat still, not holding
me or anything, then I felt a soft lump under my thigh begin
to move. It twitched against me and started to harden. Then
he pulled me to his chest. He smelled of coal dust and grease
and he was so close I buried my face in his shirt and listened to
his heart, it was beating just for me. Only I could hear the
thud, only I could feel the jumping on my face. He said, “Sit
still, stop squirming.” But all the time, he pushed me around
on his lap, then suddenly he stood up and I slipped down to
the floor. He ran to the bathroom.

For months he stopped speaking to me again. I was hurt
and for a time felt lonelier than ever. But then I forgot about
him, and even the memory of his holding me precious melted
into the general darkness just beyond the great blinkers of
childhood.

I read more than ever, and wished my soul that I had been
born a boy. Horatio Alger was the greatest writer in the
world. His heroes were always good, always won and were
always boys. I could have developed the first two virtues, but
becoming a boy was sure to be difficult, if not impossible.

The Sunday funnies influenced me, and although I
admired the strong heroes who always conquered in the end, I
identified with Tiny Tim. In the toilet, where I used to take
the papers, it was tortuous to look for and exclude the unnec-
essary pages so that I could learn how he would finally outwit




76



MAYA ANGELOU



his latest adversary. I wept with relief every Sunday as he
eluded the evil men and bounded back from each seeming
defeat as sweet and gentle as ever. The Katzenjammer kids
were fun because they made the adults look stupid. But they
were a little too smart-alecky for my taste.

When spring came to St. Louis, I took out my first library
card, and since Bailey and I seemed to be growing apart, I
spent most of my Saturdays at the library (no interruptions)
breathing in the world of penniless shoeshine boys who, with
goodness and perseverance, became rich, rich men, and gave
baskets of goodies to the poor on holidays. The little princesses
who were mistaken for maids, and the long-lost children mis-
taken for waifs, became more real to me than our house, our
mother, our school or Mr. Freeman.

During those months we saw our grandparents and the
uncles (our only aunt had gone to California to build her for-
tune), but they usually asked the same question, “Have you
been good children?” for which there was only one answer.
Even Bailey wouldn’t have dared to answer No.



CHAPTER 12





On a late spring Saturday, after our chores (nothing like those
in Stamps) were done, Bailey and I were going out, he to play
baseball and I to the library. Mr. Freeman said to me, after
Bailey had gone downstairs, “Ritie, go get some milk for the
house.”

Mother usually brought milk when she came in, but that
morning as Bailey and I straightened the living room her bed-
room door had been open, and we knew that she hadn’t come
home the night before.

He gave me the money and I rushed to the store and back
to the house. After putting the milk in the icebox, I turned
and had just reached the front door when I heard, “Ritie.” He
was sitting in the big chair by the radio. “Ritie, come here.” I
didn t think about the holding time until I got close to him.
His pants were open and his “thing” was standing out of his
britches by itself.

No, sir, Mr. Freeman.” I started to back away. I didn’t
want to touch that mushy-hard thing again, and I didn’t need
him to hold me any more. He grabbed my arm and pulled me




78



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



79






between his legs. His face was still and looked kind, but he
didn’t smile or blink his eyes. Nothing. He did nothing,
except reach his left hand around to turn on the radio without
even looking at it. Over the noise of music and static, he said,
“Now, this ain’t gonna hurt you much. You liked it before,
didn’t you?”

I didn’t want to admit that I had in fact liked his holding
me or that I had liked his smell or the hard heart-beating, so I
said nothing. And his face became like the face of one of those
mean natives the Phantom was always having to beat up.

His legs were squeezing my waist. “Pull down your
drawers.” I hesitated for two reasons: he was holding me too
tight to move, and I was sure that any minute my mother
or Bailey or the Green Hornet would bust in the door and
save me.

“We was just playing before.” He released me enough to
snatch down my bloomers, and then he dragged me closer to
him. Turning the radio up loud, too loud, he said, “If you
scream, I’m gonna kill you. And if you tell, I’m gonna kill
Bailey.” I could tell he meant what he said. I couldn’t under-
stand why he wanted to kill my brother. 'Neither of us had
done anything to him. And then.

Then there was the pain. A breaking and entering when
even the senses are torn apart. The act of rape on an eight-
year-old body is a matter of the needle giving because the
camel can’t. The child gives, because the body can, and the
mind of the violator cannot.

I thought I had died — I woke up in a white-walled world,
and it had to be heaven. But Mr. Freeman was there and he
was washing me. His hands shook, but he held me upright in
the tub and washed my legs. “I didn’t mean to hurt you, Ritie.



I didn’t mean it. But don’t you tell . . . Remember, don’t you
tell a soul.”

I felt cool and very clean and just a little tired. “No, sir,
Mr. Freeman, I won’t tell.” I was somewhere above every-
thing. “It’s just that I’m so tired I’ll just go and lay down a
while, please,” I whispered to him. I thought if I spoke out
loud, he might become frightened and hurt me again. He
dried me and handed me my bloomers. “Put these on and go
to the library. Your momma ought to be coming home soon.
You just act natural.”

Walking down the street, I felt the wet on my pants, and
my hips seemed to be coming out of their sockets. I couldn’t sit
long on the hard seats in the library (they had been con-
structed for children), so I walked by the empty lot where
Bailey was playing ball, but he wasn’t there. I stood for a while
and watched the big boys tear around the dusty diamond and
then headed home.

After two blocks, I knew I’d never make it. Not unless I
counted every step and stepped on every crack. I had started to
burn between my legs more than the time I’d wasted Sloan’s
Liniment on myself. My legs throbbed, or rather the insides of
my thighs throbbed, with the same force that Mr. Freeman’s
heart had beaten. Thrum . . . step . . . thrum . . . step . . . step
on the crack . . . thrum . . . step. I went up the stairs one at a,
one at a, one at a time. No one was in the living room, so I
went straight to bed, after hiding my red-and-yellow-stained
drawers under the mattress.

When Mother came in she said, “Well, young lady, I
believe this is the first time I’ve seen you go to bed without
being told. You must be sick.”

I wasn’t sick, but the pit of my stomach was on fire — how
could I tell her that? Bailey came in later and asked me what



i



80



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



81



the matter was. There was nothing to tell him. When Mother
called us to eat and I said I wasn’t hungry, she laid her cool
hand on my forehead and cheeks. “Maybe it’s the measles.
They say they’re going around the neighborhood.” After she
took my temperature she said, “You have a little fever. You’ve
probably just caught them.”

Mr. Freeman took up the whole doorway, “Then Bailey
ought not to be in there with her. Unless you want a house full
of sick children.” She answered over her shoulder, “He may as
well have them now as later. Get them over with.” She
brushed by Mr. Freeman as if he were made of cotton. “Come
on, Junior. Get some cool towels and wipe your sister’s face.”

As Bailey left the room, Mr. Freeman advanced to the
bed. He leaned over, his whole face a threat that could have
smothered me. “If you tell . . .” And again so softly, I almost
didn t hear it — -“If you tell.” I couldn’t summon up the energy
to answer him. He had to know that I wasn’t going to tell any-
thing. Bailey came in with the towels and Mr. Freeman
walked out.

Later Mother made a broth and sat on the edge of the bed
to feed me. The liquid went down my throat like bones. My
belly and behind were as heavy as cold iron, but it seemed my
head had gone away and pure air had replaced it on my shoul-
ders. Bailey read to me from The Rover Boys until he got
sleepy and went to bed.

That night I kept waking to hear Mother and Mr.
Freeman arguing. I couldn’t hear what they were saying, but I
did hope that she wouldn’t make him so mad that he’d hurt
her too. I knew he could do it, with his cold face and empty
eyes. Their voices came in faster and faster, the high sounds
on the heels of the lows. I would have liked to have gone in.
Just passed through as if I were going to the toilet. Just show



my face and they might stop, but my legs refused to move. I
could move the toes and ankles, but the knees had turned
to wood.

Maybe I slept, but soon morning was there and Mother
was pretty over my bed. “How’re you feeling, baby?”

Fine, Mother.” An instinctive answer. “Where’s Bailey?”

She said he was still asleep but that she hadn’t slept all
night. She had been in my room off and on to see about me. I
asked her where Mr. Freeman was, and her face chilled with
remembered anger. He’s gone. Moved this morning. I’m
going to take your temperature after I put on your Cream of
Wheat.”

Could I tell her now? The terrible pain assured me that I
couldn t. What he did to me, and what I allowed, must have
been very bad if already God let me hurt so much. If Mr.
Freeman was gone, did that mean Bailey was out of danger?
And if so, if I told him, would he still love me?

After Mother took my temperature, she said she was
going to bed for a while but to wake her if I felt sicker. She
told Bailey to watch my face and arms for spots and when they
came up he could paint them with calamine lotion.

That Sunday goes and comes in my memory like a bad
connection on an overseas telephone call. Once, Bailey was
reading The Katzenjammer Kids to me, and then without a
pause for sleeping, Mother was looking closely at my face, and
soup trickled down my chin and some got into my mouth and
I choked. Then there was a doctor who took my temperature
and held my wrist.

Bailey!” I supposed I had screamed, for he materialized
suddenly, and I asked him to help me and we’d run away to
California or France or Chicago. I knew that I was dying and,
in fact, I longed for death, but I didn’t want to die anywhere




82



MAYA ANGELOU



near Mr. Freeman. I knew that even now he wouldn’t have
allowed death to have me unless he wished it to.

Mother said I should be bathed and the linens had to be
changed since I had sweat so much. But when they tried to
move me I fought, and even Bailey couldn’t hold me. Then
she picked me up in her arms and the terror abated for a
while. Bailey began to change the bed. As he pulled off the
soiled sheets he dislodged the panties I had put under the mat-
tress. They fell at Mother’s feet.



CHAPTER 13





I N the hospital, Bailey told me that I had to tell who did that
to me, or the man would hurt another little girl. When I
explained that I couldn’t tell because the man would kill him,
Bailey said knowingly, “He can’t kill me. I won’t let him.”
And of course I believed him. Bailey didn’t lie to me. So I
told him.

Bailey cried at the side of my bed until I started to cry too.
Almost fifteen years passed before I saw my brother cry again.

Using the old brain he was born with (those were his
words later on that day) he gave his information to Grand-
mother Baxter, and Mr. Freeman was arrested and was spared
the awful wrath of my pistol-whipping uncles.

I would have liked to stay in the hospital the rest of my
life. Mother brought flowers and candy. Grandmother came
with fruit and my uncles clumped around and around my
bed, snorting like wild horses. When they were able to sneak
Bailey in, he read to me for hours.

# # #




84



MAYA ANGELOU



The saying that people who have nothing to do become
busybodies is not the only truth. Excitement is a drug, and
people whose lives are filled with violence are always won-
dering where the next “fix” is coming from.

The court was filled. Some people even stood behind the
churchlike benches in the rear. Overhead fans moved with the
detachment of old men. Grandmother Baxter’s clients were
there in gay and flippant array. The gamblers in pin-striped
suits and their makeup-deep women whispered to me out of
blood-red mouths that now I knew as much as they did. I was
eight, and grown. Even the nurses in the hospital had told me
that now I had nothing to fear. “The worst is over for you,”
they had said. So I put the words in all the smirking mouths.

I sat with my family (Bailey couldn’t come) and they
rested still on the seats like solid, cold gray tombstones. Thick
and forevermore unmoving.

Poor Mr. Freeman twisted in his chair to look empty
threats over to me. He didn’t know that he couldn’t kill
Bailey . . . and Bailey didn’t lie . . . to me.

What was the defendant wearing?” That was Mr.
Freeman’s lawyer.

“I don’t know.”

You mean to say this man raped you and you don’t know
what he was wearing?” He snickered as if I had raped Mr.
Freeman. ‘Do you know if you were raped?”

A sound pushed in the air of the court (I was sure it was
laughter). I was glad that Mother had let me wear the navy-
blue winter coat with brass buttons. Although it was too short
and the weather was typical St. Fouis hot, the coat was a
friend that I hugged to me in the strange and unfriendly place.

Was that the first time the accused touched you?” The
question stopped me. Mr. Freeman had surely done some-



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 85

thing very wrong, but I was convinced that I had helped him
to do it. I didn t want to lie, but the lawyer wouldn’t let me
think, so I used silence as a retreat.

Did the accused try to touch you before the time he or
rather you say he raped you?”

I couldn’t say yes and tell them how he had loved me once
for a few minutes and how he had held me close before he
thought I had peed in my bed. My uncles would kill me and
Grandmother Baxter would stop speaking, as she often did
when she was angry. And all those people in the court would
stone me as they had stoned the harlot in the Bible. And
Mother, who thought I was such a good girl, would be so dis-
appointed. But most important, there was Bailey. I had kept a
big secret from him.

“Marguerite, answer the question. Did the accused touch
you before the occasion on which you claim he raped you?”

Everyone in the court knew that the answer had to be No.
Everyone except Mr. Freeman and me. I looked at his heavy
face trying to look as if he would have liked me to say No. I
said No.

The lie lumped in my throat and I couldn’t get air. How I
despised the man for making me he. Old, mean, nasty thing.
Old, black, nasty thing. The tears didn’t soothe my heart as
they usually did. I screamed, “Ole, mean, dirty thing, you.
Dirty old thing.” Our lawyer brought me off the stand and to
my mother s arms. The fact that I had arrived at my desired
destination by lies made it less appealing to me.

Mr. Freeman was given one year and one day, but he
never got a chance to do his time. His lawyer (or someone) got
him released that very afternoon.

In the living room, where the shades were drawn for cool-
ness, Bailey and I played Monopoly on the floor. I played a bad



86 MAYA ANGELOU

game because I was thinking how I would be able to tell
Bailey how I had lied and, even worse for our relationship,
kept a secret from him. Bailey answered the doorbell, because
Grandmother was in the kitchen. A tall white policeman
asked for Mrs. Baxter. Had they found out about the lie?
Maybe the policeman was coming to put me in jail because I
had sworn on the Bible that everything I said would be the
truth, the whole truth, so help me, God. The man in our
living room was taller than the sky and whiter than my image
of God. He just didn’t have the beard.

“Mrs. Baxter, I thought you ought to know. Freeman’s
been found dead on the lot behind the slaughterhouse.”

Softly, as if she were discussing a church program, she
said, Poor man.” She wiped her hands on the dishtowel and
just as softly asked, “Do they know who did it?”

The policeman said, “Seems like he was dropped there.
Some say he was kicked to death.”

Grandmother’s color only rose a little. “Tom, thanks for
telling me. Poor man. Well, maybe it’s better this way. He was
a mad dog. Would you like a glass of lemonade? Or some
beer?”

Although he looked harmless, I knew' he was a dreadful
angel counting out my many sins.

“No, thanks, Mrs. Baxter. I’m on duty. Gotta be getting
back.”

“Well, tell your ma that I’ll be over when I take up my
beer and remind her to save some kraut for me.”

And the recording angel was gone. He was gone, and a
man was dead because I lied. Where was the balance in that?
One lie surely wouldn’t be worth a man’s life. Bailey could
have explained it all to me, but I didn’t dare ask him. Obvi-
ously I had forfeited my place in heaven forever, and I was as



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 87

gutless as the doll I had ripped to pieces ages ago. Even Christ
Himself turned His back on Satan. Wouldn’t He turn His
back on me? I could feel the evilness flowing through my
body and waiting, pent up, to rush off my tongue if I tried to
open my mouth. I clamped my teeth shut, I’d hold it in. If it
escaped, wouldn’t it flood the world and all the innocent
people?

Grandmother Baxter said, “Ritie and Junior, you didn’t
hear a thing. I never want to hear this situation nor that evil
man’s name mentioned in my house again. I mean that.” She
went back into the kitchen to make apple strudel for my
celebration.

Even Bailey was frightened. He sat all to himself, looking
at a man’s death — a kitten looking at a wolf. Not quite under-
standing it but frightened all the same.

In those moments I decided that although Bailey loved me
he couldn’t help. I had sold myself to the Devil and there
could be no escape. The only thing I could do was to stop
talking to people other than Bailey. Instinctively, or somehow,
I knew that because I loved him so much I’d never hurt him,
but if I talked to anyone else that person might die too. Just
my breath, carrying my words out, might poison people
and they’d curl up and die like the black fat slugs that only
pretended.

I had to stop talking.

I discovered that to achieve perfect personal silence all I
had to do was to attach myself leechlike to sound. I began to
listen to everything. I probably hoped that after I had heard all
the sounds, really heard them and packed them down, deep in
my ears, the world would be quiet around me. I walked into
rooms where people were laughing, their voices hitting the
walls like stones, and I simply stood still — in the midst of the




88



MAYA ANGELOU



riot of sound. After a minute or two, silence would rush into
the room from its hiding place because I had eaten up all the
sounds.

In the first weeks my family accepted my behavior as a
post-rape, post-hospital affliction. (Neither the term nor the
experience was mentioned in Grandmother’s house, where
Bailey and I were again staying.) They understood that I
could talk to Bailey, but to no one else.

Then came the last visit from the visiting nurse, and the
doctor said I was healed. That meant that I should be back on
the sidewalks playing handball or enjoying the games I had
been given when I was sick. When I refused to be the child
they knew and accepted me to be, I was called impudent and
my muteness sullenness.

For a while I was punished for being so uppity that I
wouldn t speak; and then came the thrashings, given by any
relative who felt himself offended.

We were on the train going back to Stamps, and this time
it was I who had to console Bailey. He cried his heart out
down the aisles of the coach, and pressed his little-boy body
against the window pane looking for a last glimpse of his
Mother Dear.

I have never known if Momma sent for us, or if the St.
Louis family just got fed up with my grim presence. There is
nothing more appalling than a constantly morose child.

I cared less about the trip than about the fact that Bailey
was unhappy, and had no more thought of our destination
than if I had simply been heading for the toilet.



CHAPTER 14





The barrenness of Stamps was exactly what I wanted,
without will or consciousness. After St. Louis, with its noise
and activity, its trucks and buses, and loud family gatherings, I
welcomed the obscure lanes and lonely bungalows set back
deep in dirt yards.

The resignation of its inhabitants encouraged me to relax.
They showed me a contentment based on the belief that
nothing more was coming to them, although a great deal
more was due. Their decision to be satisfied with life’s
inequities was a lesson for me. Entering Stamps, I had the
feeling that I was stepping over the border lines of the map
and would fall, without fear, right off the end of the world.
Nothing more could happen, for in Stamps nothing
happened.

Into this cocoon I crept.

For an indeterminate time, nothing was demanded of me
or of Bailey. We were, after all, Mrs. Henderson’s California
grandchildren, and had been away on a glamorous trip way
up North to the fabulous St. Louis. Our father had come the



90



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



91



year before, driving a big, shiny automobile and speaking the
King’s English with a big city accent, so all we had to do was
lie quiet for months and rake in the profits of our adventures.

Farmers and maids, cooks and handymen, carpenters and
all the children in town, made regular pilgrimages to the
Store. “Just to see the travelers.”

They stood around like cutout cardboard figures and
asked, “Well, how is it up North?”

“See any of them big buildings?”

“Ever ride in one of them elevators?”

“Was you scared?”

“Whitefolks any different, like they say?”

Bailey took it upon himself to answer every question, and
from a corner of his lively imagination wove a tapestry of
entertainment for them that I was sure was as foreign to him
as it was to me.

He, as usual, spoke precisely. “They have, in the North,
buildings so high that for months, in the winter, you can’t see
the top floors.”

“Tell the truth.”

“They’ve got watermelons twice the size of a cow’s head
and sweeter than syrup.” I distinctly remember his intent face
and the fascinated faces of his listeners. “And if you can count
the watermelon’s seeds, before it’s cut open, you can win five
zillion dollars and a new car.”

Momma, knowing Bailey, warned, “Now Ju, be careful
you don’t slip up on a not true.” (Nice people didn’t say “lie.”)
“Everybody wears new clothes and have inside toilets. If
you fall down in one of them, you get flushed away into the
Mississippi River. Some people have iceboxes, only the proper
name is Cold Spot or Frigidaire. The snow is so deep you can
get buried right outside your door and people won’t find you



for a year. We made ice cream out of the snow.” That was the
only fact that I could have supported. During the winter, we
had collected a bowl of snow and poured Pet milk over it, and
sprinkled it with sugar and called it ice cream.

Momma beamed and Uncle Willie was proud when
Bailey regaled the customers with our exploits. We were
drawing cards for the Store and objects of the town’s adora-
tion. Our journey to magical places alone was a spot of color
on the town’s drab canvas, and our return made us even more
the most enviable of people.

High spots in Stamps were usually negative: droughts,
floods, lynchings and deaths.

Bailey played on the country folks’ need for diversion. Just
after our return he had taken to sarcasm, picked it up as one
might pick up a stone, and put it snufflike under his lip. The
double entendres, the two-pronged sentences, slid over his
tongue to dart rapier-like into anything that happened to be in
the way. Our customers, though, generally were so straight
thinking and speaking that they were never hurt by his
attacks. They didn’t comprehend them.

“Bailey Junior sound just like Big Bailey. Got a silver
tongue. Just like his daddy.”

“I hear tell they don’t pick cotton up there. How the
people live then?”

Bailey said that the cotton up North was so tall, if ordinary
people tried to pick it they’d have to get up on ladders, so the
cotton farmers had their cotton picked by machines.

For a while I was the only recipient of Bailey’s kindness. It
was not that he pitied me but that he felt we were in the same
boat for different reasons, and that I could understand his
frustration just as he could countenance my withdrawal.

I never knew if Uncle Willie had been told about the



92



MAYA ANGELOU



incident in St. Louis, but sometimes I caught him watching
me with a far-off look in his big eyes. Then he would quickly
send me on some errand that would take me out of his pres-
ence. When that happened I was both relieved and ashamed. I
certainly didn’t want a cripple’s sympathy (that would have
been a case of the blind leading the blind), nor did I want
Uncle Willie, whom I loved in my fashion, to think of me as
being sinful and dirty. If he thought so, at least I didn’t want
to know it.

Sounds came to me dully, as if people were speaking
through their handkerchiefs or with their hands over their
mouths. Colors weren’t true either, but rather a vague assort-
ment of shaded pastels that indicated not so much color as
faded familiarities. People’s names escaped me and I began to
worry over my sanity. After all, we had been away less than a
year, and customers whose accounts I had formerly remem-
bered without consulting the ledger were now complete
strangers.

People, except Momma and Uncle Willie, accepted my
unwillingness to talk as a natural outgrowth of a reluctant
return to the South. And an indication that I was pining for
the high times we had had in the big city. Then, too, I was
well known for being “tender-hearted.” Southern Negroes
used that term to mean sensitive and tended to look upon a
person with that affliction as being a little sick or in delicate
health. So I was not so much forgiven as I was understood.



CHAPTER 1 5

Nsaey-



For nearly a year, I sopped around the house, the Store, the
school and the church, like an old biscuit, dirty and inedible.
Then I met, or rather got to know, the lady who threw me my
first life line.

Mrs. Bertha Flowers was the aristocrat of Black Stamps.
She had the grace of control to appear warm in the coldest
weather, and on the Arkansas summer days it seemed she had
a private breeze which swirled around, cooling her. She was
thin without the taut look of wiry people, and her printed
voile dresses and flowered hats were as right for her as denim
overalls for a farmer. She was our side’s answer to the richest
white woman in town.

Her skin was a rich black that would have peeled like a
plum if snagged, but then no one would have thought of get-
ting close enough to Mrs. Flowers to ruffle her dress, let along
snag her skin. She didn’t encourage familiarity. She wore
gloves too.

I don t think I ever saw Mrs. Flowers laugh, but she
smiled often. A slow widening of her thin black lips to show



94



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



95



even, small white teeth, then the slow effortless closing. When
she chose to smile on me, I always wanted to thank her. The
action was so graceful and inclusively benign.

She was one of the few gentlewomen I have ever known,
and has remained throughout my life the measure of what a
human being can be.

Momma had a strange relationship with her. Most often
when she passed on the road in front of the Store, she spoke
to Momma in that soft yet carrying voice, “Good day, Mrs.
Henderson.” Momma responded with “How you, Sister
Flowers?”

Mrs. Flowers didn’t belong to our church, nor was she
Momma’s familiar. Why on earth did she insist on calling her
Sister Flowers? Shame made me want to hide my face. Mrs.
Flowers deserved better than to be called Sister. Then, Momma
left out the verb. Why not ask, “How are you, Mrs. Flowers?”
With the unbalanced passion of the young, I hated her for
showing her ignorance to Mrs. Flowers. It didn’t occur to me
for many years that they were as alike as sisters, separated only
by formal education.

Although I was upset, neither of the women was in the
least shaken by what I thought an unceremonious greeting.
Mrs. Flowers would continue her easy gait up the hill to her
little bungalow, and Momma kept on shelling peas or doing
whatever had brought her to the front porch.

Occasionally, though, Mrs. Flowers would drift off the
road and down to the Store and Momma would say to me,
“Sister, you go on and play.” As I left I would hear the begin-
ning of an intimate conversation. Momma persistently using
the wrong verb, or none at all.

“Brother and Sister Wilcox is sho’ly the meanest — ” “Is,”
Momma? “Is”? Oh, please, not “is,” Momma, for two or more.



But they talked, and from the side of the building where I
waited for the ground to open up and swallow me, I heard the
soft-voiced Mrs. Flowers and the textured voice of my grand-
mother merging and melting. They were interrupted from
time to time by giggles that must have come from Mrs. Flowers
(Momma never giggled in her life). Then she was gone.

She appealed to me because she was like people I had
never met personally. Like women in English novels who
walked the moors (whatever they were) with their loyal dogs
racing at a respectful distance. Like the women who sat in
front of roaring fireplaces, drinking tea incessantly from silver
trays full of scones and crumpets. Women who walked over
the “heath” and read morocco-bound books and had two last
names divided by a hyphen. It would be safe to say that she
made me proud to be Negro, just by being herself.

She acted just as refined as whitefolks in the movies and
books and she was more beautiful, for none of them could
have come near that warm color without looking gray by
comparison.

It was fortunate that I never saw her in the company of
powhitefolks. For since they tend to think of their whiteness
as an evenizer, I’m certain that I would have had to hear her
spoken to commonly as Bertha, and my image of her would
have been shattered like the unmendable Humpty-Dumpty.

One summer afternoon, sweet-milk fresh in my memory,
she stopped at the Store to buy provisions. Another Negro
woman of her health and age would have been expected to
carry the paper sacks home in one hand, but Momma said,
“Sister Flowers, I’ll send Bailey up to your house with these
things.”

She smiled that slow dragging smile, “Thank you, Mrs.
Henderson. I’d prefer Marguerite, though.” My name was




96



MAYA ANGELOU



i KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



97



beautiful when she said it. “I’ve been meaning to talk to her,
anyway.” They gave each other age-group looks.

Momma said, “Well, that’s all right then. Sister, go and
change your dress. You going to Sister Flowers’.”

The chifforobe was a maze. What on earth did one put on
to go to Mrs. Flowers’ house? I knew I shouldn’t put on a
Sunday dress. It might be sacrilegious. Certainly not a house
dress, since I was already wearing a fresh one. I chose a school
dress, naturally. It was formal without suggesting that going
to Mrs. Flowers’ house was equivalent to attending church.

I trusted myself back into the Store.

“Now, don’t you look nice.” I had chosen the right thing,
for once.

“Mrs. Henderson, you make most of the children’s
clothes, don’t you?”

“Yes, ma’am. Sure do. Store-bought clothes ain’t hardly
worth the thread it take to stitch them.”

“I’ll say you do a lovely job, though, so neat. That dress
looks professional.”

Momma was enjoying the seldom-received compliments.
Since everyone we knew (except Mrs. Flowers, of course)
could sew competently, praise was rarely handed out for the
commonly practiced craft.

“I try, with the help of the Lord, Sister Flowers, to finish
the inside just like I does the outside. Come here, Sister.”

I had buttoned up the collar and tied the belt, apronlike, in
back. Momma told me to turn around. With one hand she
pulled the strings and the belt fell free at both sides of my
waist. Then her large hands were at my neck, opening the
button loops. I was terrified. What was happening?

“Take it off, Sister.” She had her hands on the hem of the
dress.



I don t need to see the inside,” Mrs. Henderson, I can
tell . . . But the dress was over my head and my arms were
stuck in the sleeves. Momma said, “That’ll do. See here, Sister
Flowers, I French-seams around the armholes.” Through the
cloth film, I saw the shadow approach. “That makes it last
longer. Children these days would bust out of sheet-metal
clothes. They so rough.”

That is a very good job, Mrs. Henderson. You should be
proud. You can put your dress back on, Marguerite.”

No ma am. Pride is a sin. And ’cording to the Good
Book, it goeth before a fall.”

That s right. So the Bible says. It’s a good thing to keep in
mind.”

I wouldn’t look at either of them. Momma hadn’t thought
that taking off my dress in front of Mrs. Flowers would kill
me stone dead. If I had refused, she would have thought I was
trymg to be womanish” and might have remembered St.
Louis. Mrs. Flowers had known that I would be embarrassed
and that was even worse. I picked up the groceries and went
out to wait in the hot sunshine. It would be fitting if I got a
sunstroke and died before they came outside. Just dropped
dead on the slanting porch.

There was a little path beside the rocky road, and Mrs.
Flowers walked in front swinging her arms and picking her
way over the stones.

She said, without turning her head, to me, “I hear you’re
doing very good school work, Marguerite, but that it’s all
written. The teachers report that they have trouble getting
you to talk in class.” We passed the triangular farm on our left
and the path widened to allow us to walk together. I hung
back in the separate unasked and unanswerable questions.

“Come and walk along with me, Marguerite.” I couldn’t



98



MAYA ANG ELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



99



have refused even if I wanted to. She pronounced my name so
nicely. Or more correctly, she spoke each word with such
clarity that I was certain a foreigner who didn’t understand
English could have understood her.

“Now no one is going to make you talk — possibly no one
can. But bear in mind, language is man’s way of communi-
cating with his fellow man and it is language alone which
separates him from the lower animals.” That was a totally
new idea to me, and I would need time to think about it.

“Your grandmother says you read a lot. Every chance you
get. That’s good, but not good enough. Words mean more
than what is set down on paper. It takes the human voice to
infuse them with the shades of deeper meaning.”

I memorized the part about the human voice infusing
words. It seemed so valid and poetic.

She said she was going to give me some books and that I
not only must read them, I must read them aloud. She sug-
gested that I try to make a sentence sound in as many different
ways as possible.

“I’ll accept no excuse if you return a book to me that has
been badly handled.” My imagination boggled at the punish-
ment I would deserve if in fact I did abuse a book of Mrs.
Flowers’. Death would be too kind and brief.

The odors in the house surprised me. Somehow I had
never connected Mrs. Flowers with food or eating or any
other common experience of common people. There must
have been an outhouse, too, but my mind never recorded it.

The sweet scent of vanilla had met us as she opened
the door.

“I made tea cookies this morning. You see, I had planned
to invite you for cookies and lemonade so we could have this
little chat. The lemonade is in the icebox.”



It followed that Mrs. Flowers would have ice on an ordi-
nary day, when most families in our town bought ice late on
Saturdays only a few times during the summer to be used in
the wooden ice-cream freezers.

She took the bags from me and disappeared through the
kitchen door. I looked around the room that I had never in
my wildest fantasies imagined I would see. Browned photo-
graphs leered or threatened from the walls and the white,
freshly done curtains pushed against themselves and against
the wind. I wanted to gobble up the room entire and take it to
Bailey, who would help me analyze and enjoy it.

“Have a seat, Marguerite. Over there by the table.” She
carried a platter covered with a tea towel. Although she
warned that she hadn’t tried her hand at baking sweets for
some time, I was certain that like everything else about her the
cookies would be perfect.

They were flat round wafers, slightly browned on the
edges and butter-yellow in the center. With the cold lemonade
they were sufficient for childhood’s lifelong diet. Remem-
bering my manners, I took nice little lady-like bites off the
edges. She said she had made them expressly for me and that
she had a few in the kitchen that I could take home to my
Brother. So I jammed one whole cake in my mouth and the
rough crumbs scratched the insides of my jaws, and if I hadn’t
had to swallow, it would have been a dream come true.

As I ate she began the first of what we later called “my
lessons in living.” She said that I must always be intolerant of
ignorance but understanding of illiteracy. That some people,
unable to go to school, were more educated and even more
intelligent than college professors. She encouraged me to
listen carefully to what country people called mother wit.




100



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



101



That in those homely sayings was couched the collective
wisdom of generations.

When I finished the cookies she brushed off the table and
brought a thick, small book from the bookcase. I had read A
Tale of Two Cities and found it up to my standards as a
romantic novel. She opened the first page and I heard poetry
for the first time in my life.

“It was the best of time and the worst of times . . .” Her
voice slid in and curved down through and over the words.
She was nearly singing. I wanted to look at the pages. Were
they the same that I had read? Or were there notes, music,
lined on the pages, as in a hymn book? Her sounds began cas-
cading gently. I knew from listening to a thousand preachers
that she was nearing the end of her reading, and I hadn’t
really heard, heard to understand, a single word.

“How do you like that?”

It occurred to me that she expected a response. The sweet
vanilla flavor was still on my tongue and her reading was a
wonder in my ears. I had to speak.

I said, “Yes, ma’am.” It was the least I could do, but it was
the most also.

“There’s one more thing. Take this book of poems and
memorize one for me. Next time you pay me a visit, I want
you to recite.”

I have tried often to search behind the sophistication of
years for the enchantment I so easily found in those gifts. The
essence escapes but its aura remains. To be allowed, no,
invited, into the private lives of strangers, and to share their
joys and lears, was a chance to exchange the Southern bitter
wormwood for a cup of mead with Beowulf or a hot cup of tea
and milk with Oliver Twist. When I said aloud, “It is a far, far



better thing that I do, than I have ever done . . .” tears of love
filled my eyes at my selflessness.

On that first day, I ran down the hill and into the road
(few cars ever came along it) and had the good sense to stop
running before I reached the Store.

I was liked, and what a difference it made. I was respected
not as Mrs. Henderson’s grandchild or Bailey’s sister but for
just being Marguerite Johnson.

Childhood’s logic never asks to be proved (all conclusions
are absolute). I didn’t question why Mrs. Flowers had singled
me out for attention, nor did it occur to me that Momma
might have asked her to give me a little talking to. All I cared
about was that she had made tea cookies for me and read to
me from her favorite book. It was enough to prove that she
liked me.

Momma and Bailey were waiting inside the Store. He
said, “My, what did she give you?” He had seen the books, but
I held the paper sack with his cookies in my arms shielded by
the poems.

Momma said, “Sister, I know you acted like a little lady.
That do my heart good to see settled people take to you all.
I’m trying my best, the Lord knows, but these days . . .” Her
voice trailed off. “Go on in and change your dress.”

In the bedroom it was going to be a joy to see Bailey
receive his cookies. I said, “By the way, Bailey, Mrs. Flowers
sent you some tea cookies — ”

Momma shouted, “What did you say, Sister? You, Sister,
what did you say?” Hot anger was crackling in her voice.

Bailey said, “She said Mrs. Flowers sent me some—”

I ain t talking to you, Ju.” I heard the heavy feet walk
across the floor toward our bedroom. “Sister, you heard me.
What s that you said? She swelled to fill the doorway.




102



MAYA ANGELOU



Bailey said, “Momma.” His pacifying voice— “Momma,
she—”

“You shut up, Ju. I’m talking to your sister.”

I didn’t know what sacred cow I had bumped, but it was

better to find out than to hang like a thread over an open fire.

I repeated, “I said, ‘Bailey, by the way, Mrs. Flowers sent
> >>

you—

“That’s what I thought you said. Go on and take off your
dress. I’m going to get a switch.”

At first I thought she was playing. Maybe some heavy joke
that would end with “You sure she didn’t send me some-
thing?” but in a minute she was back in the room with a long,
ropy, peach-tree switch, the juice smelling bitter at having
been torn loose. She said, “Get down on your knees. Bailey,
Junior, you come on, too.”

The three of us knelt as she began, “Our Father, you
know the tribulations of your humble servant. I have with
your help raised two grown boys. Many’s the day I thought I
wouldn’t be able to go on, but you gave me the strength to see
my way clear. Now, Lord, look down on this heavy heart
today. I’m trying to raise my son’s children in the way they
should go, but, oh. Lord, the Devil try to hinder me on every
hand. I never thought I’d live to hear cursing under this roof,
what I try to keep dedicated to the glorification of God. And
cursing out of the mouths of babes. But you said, in the last
days brother would turn against brother, and children against
their parents. That there would be a gnashing of teeth and a
rendering of flesh. Father, forgive this child, I beg you, on
bended knee.”

I was crying loudly now. Momma’s voice had risen to a
shouting pitch, and I knew that whatever wrong I had com-
mitted was extremely serious. She had even left the Store



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



103



untended to take up my case with God. When she finished we
were all crying. She pulled me to her with one hand and hit
me only a few times with the switch. The shock of my sin and
the emotional release of her prayer had exhausted her.

Momma wouldn’t talk right then, but later in the evening
I found that my violation lay in using the phrase “by the way.”
Momma explained that “Jesus was the Way, the Truth and
the Light,” and anyone who says “by the way” is really saying,
by Jesus, or “by God,” and the Lord’s name would not be
taken in vain in her house.

When Bailey tried to interpret the words with: “White-
folks use ‘by the way’ to mean while we’re on the subject,”
Momma reminded us that “whitefolks’ mouths were most in
general loose and their words were an abomination before
Christ.”



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



105



CHAPTER 16

■ '5=as>



Recently a white woman from Texas, who would quickly
describe herself as a liberal, asked me about my hometown.
When I told her that in Stamps my grandmother had owned
the only Negro general merchandise store since the turn of the
century, she exclaimed, “Why, you were a debutante.” Ridicu-
lous and even ludicrous. But Negro girls in small Southern
towns, whether poverty-stricken or just munching along on a
few of life s necessities, were given as extensive and irrelevant
preparations for adulthood as rich white girls shown in maga-
zines. Admittedly the training was not the same. While white
girls learned to waltz and sit gracefully with a tea cup bal-
anced on their knees, we were lagging behind, learning the
mid-Victorian values with very little money to indulge them.
(Come and see Edna Lomax spending the money she made
picking cotton on five balls of ecru tatting thread. Her fingers
are bound to snag the work and she’ll have to repeat the
stitches time and time again. But she knows that when she
buys the thread.)

We were required to embroider and I had trunkfuls of



colored dishtowels, pillowcases, runners and handkerchiefs to
my credit. I mastered the art of crocheting and tatting, and
there was a lifetime’s supply of dainty doilies that would never
be used in sacheted dresser drawers. It went without saying
that all girls could iron and wash, but the finer touches around
the home, like setting a table with real silver, baking roasts
and cooking vegetables without meat, had to be learned else-
where. Usually at the source of those habits. During my tenth
year, a white woman’s kitchen became my finishing school.

Mrs. Viola Cullinan was a plump woman who lived in a
three-bedroom house somewhere behind the post office. She
was singularly unattractive until she smiled, and then the lines
around her eyes and mouth which made her look perpetually
dirty disappeared, and her face looked like the mask of an
impish elf. She usually rested her smile until late afternoon
when her women friends dropped in and Miss Glory, the
cook, served them cold drinks on the closed-in porch.

The exactness of her house was inhuman. This glass went
here and only here. That cup had its place and it was an act of
impudent rebellion to place it anywhere else. At twelve
o clock the table was set. At 12:15 Mrs. Cullinan sat down to
dinner (whether her husband had arrived or not). At 12:16
Miss Glory brought out the food.

It took me a week to learn the difference between a salad
plate, a bread plate and a dessert plate.

Mrs. Cullinan kept up the tradition of her wealthy par-
ents. She was from Virginia. Miss Glory, who was a descen-
dant of slaves that had worked for the Cullinans, told me her
history. She had married beneath her (according to Miss
Glory). Her husband’s family hadn’t had their money very
long and what they had “didn’t ’mount to much.”

As ugly as she was, I thought privately, she was lucky to




106



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



107



get a husband above or beneath her station. But Miss Glory
wouldn t let me say a thing against her mistress. She was very
patient with me, however, over the housework. She explained
the dishware, silverware and servants’ bells.

The large round bowl in which soup was served wasn’t a
soup bowl, it was a tureen. There were goblets, sherbet
glasses, ice-cream glasses, wine glasses, green glass coffee cups
with matching saucers, and water glasses. I had a glass to
drink from, and it sat with Miss Glory’s on a separate shelf
from the others. Soup spoons, gravy boat, butter knives, salad
forks and carving platter were additions to my vocabulary and
in fact almost represented a new language. I was fascinated
with the novelty, with the fluttering Mrs. Cullinan and her
Alice-in- Wonderland house.

Her husband remains, in my memory, undefined. I
lumped him with all the other white men that I had ever seen
and tried not to see.

On our way home one evening, Miss Glory told me that
Mrs. Cullman couldn t have children. She said that she was
too delicate-boned. It was hard to imagine bones at all under
those layers of fat. Miss Glory went on to say that the doctor
had taken out all her lady organs. I reasoned that a pig’s
organs included the lungs, heart and liver, so if Mrs. Cullinan
was walking around without those essentials, it explained why
she drank alcohol out of unmarked bottles. She was keeping
herself embalmed.

When I spoke to Bailey about it, he agreed that I was
right, but he also informed me that Mr. Cullinan had two
daughters by a colored lady and that I knew them very well.
He added that the girls were the spitting image of their father.

I was unable to remember what he looked like, although I had
just left him a few hours before, but I thought of the Coleman



girls. They were very light-skinned and certainly didn’t look
very much like their mother (no one ever mentioned Mr.
Coleman).

My pity for Mrs. Cullinan preceded me the next morning
like the Cheshire cat’s smile. Those girls, who could have been
her daughters, were beautiful. They didn’t have to straighten
their hair. Even when they were caught in the rain, their braids
still hung down straight like tamed snakes. Their mouths were
pouty little cupid’s bows. Mrs. Cullinan didn’t know what she
missed. Or maybe she did. Poor Mrs. Cullinan.

For weeks after, I arrived early, left late and tried very
hard to make up for her barrenness. If she had had her own
children, she wouldn’t have had to ask me to run a thousand
errands from her back door to the back door of her friends.
Poor old Mrs. Cullinan.

Then one evening Miss Glory told me to serve the ladies
on the porch. After I set the tray down and turned toward the
kitchen, one of the women asked, “What’s your name, girl?”
It was the speckled-faced one. Mrs. Cullinan said, “She
doesn t talk much. Her name’s Margaret.”

“Is she dumb?”

“No. As I understand it, she can talk when she wants
to but she s usually quiet as a little mouse. Aren’t you,
Margaret?”

I smiled at her. Poor thing. No organs and couldn’t even
pronounce my name correctly.

“She’s a sweet little thing, though.”

Well, that may be, but the name’s too long. I’d never
bother myself. I’d call her Mary if I was you.”

I fumed into the kitchen. That horrible woman would
never have the chance to call me Mary because if I was
starving I’d never work for her. I decided I wouldn’t pee on



108



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



109



her if her heart was on fire. Giggles drifted in off the porch
and into Miss Glory’s pots. I wondered what they could be
laughing about.

Whitefolks were so strange. Could they be talking about
me? Everybody knew that they stuck together better than the
Negroes did. It was possible that Mrs. Cullinan had friends in
St. Louis who heard about a girl from Stamps being in court
and wrote to tell her. Maybe she knew about Mr. Freeman.

My lunch was in my mouth a second time and I went out-
side and relieved myself on the bed of four-o’clocks. Miss
Glory thought I might be coming down with something and
told me to go on home, that Momma would give me some
herb tea, and she’d explain to her mistress.

I realized how foolish I was being before I reached the
pond. Of course Mrs. Cullinan didn’t know. Otherwise she
wouldn’t have given me the two nice dresses that Momma cut
down, and she certainly wouldn’t have called me a “sweet
little thing.” My stomach felt fine, and I didn’t mention any-
thing to Momma.

That evening I decided to write a poem on being white,
fat, old and without children. It was going to be a tragic
ballad. I would have to watch her carefully to capture the
essence of her loneliness and pain.

The very next day, she called me by the wrong name. Miss
Glory and I were washing up the lunch dishes when Mrs. Cul-
linan came to the doorway. “Mary?”

Miss Glory asked, “Who?”

Mrs. Cullinan, sagging a little, knew and I knew. “I want
Mary to go down to Mrs. Randall’s and take her some soup.
She’s not been feeling well for a few days.”

Miss Glory’s face was a wonder to see. “You mean Mar-
garet, ma’am. Her name’s Margaret.”



“That’s too long. She’s Mary from now on. Heat that soup
from last night and put it in the china tureen and, Mary, I
want you to carry it carefully.”

Every person I knew had a hellish horror of being “called
out of his name.” It was a dangerous practice to call a Negro
anything that could be loosely construed as insulting because
of the centuries of their having been called niggers, jigs,
dinges, blackbirds, crows, boots and spooks.

Miss Glory had a fleeting second of feeling sorry for me.
Then as she handed me the hot tureen she said, “Don’t mind,
don t pay that no mind. Sticks and stones may break your
bones, but words . . . You know, I been working for her for
twenty years.”

She held the back door open for me. “Twenty years. I
wasn’t much older than you. My name used to be Hallelujah.
That s what Ma named me, but my mistress give me ‘Glory,’
and it stuck. I likes it better too.”

I was in the little path that ran behind the houses when
Miss Glory shouted, “It’s shorter too.”

For a few seconds it was a tossup over whether I would
laugh (imagine being named Hallelujah) or cry (imagine let-
ting some white woman rename you for her convenience). My
anger saved me from either outburst. I had to quit the job, but
the problem was going to be how to do it. Momma wouldn’t
allow me to quit for just any reason.

“She’s a peach. That woman is a real peach.” Mrs. Ran-
dall s maid was talking as she took the soup from me, and I
wondered what her name used to be and what she answered
to now.

For a week I looked into Mrs. Cullinan’s face as she called
me Mary. She ignored my coming late and leaving early. Miss
Glory was a little annoyed because I had begun to leave egg



110



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



111



yolk on the dishes and wasn’t putting much heart in polishing
the silver. I hoped that she would complain to our boss, but
she didn’t.

Then Bailey solved my dilemma. He had me describe the
contents of the cupboard and the particular plates she liked
best. Her favorite piece was a casserole shaped like a fish and
the green glass coffee cups. I kept his instructions in mind, so
on the next day when Miss Glory was hanging out clothes and
I had again been told to serve the old biddies on the porch, I
dropped the empty serving tray. When I heard Mrs. Cullinan
scream, Mary! ’ I picked up the casserole and two of the
green glass cups in readiness. As she rounded the kitchen door
I let them fall on the tiled floor.

I could never absolutely describe to Bailey what happened
next, because each time I got to the part where she fell on the
floor and screwed up her ugly face to cry, we burst out
laughing. She actually wobbled around on the floor and
picked up shards of the cups and cried, “Oh, Momma. Oh,
dear Gawd. It’s Momma’s china from Virginia. Oh, Momma,
I sorry.”

Miss Glory came running in from the yard and the
women from the porch crowded around. Miss Glory was
almost as broken up as her mistress. “You mean to say she
broke our Virginia dishes? What we gone do?”

Mrs. Cullinan cried louder, “That clumsy nigger. Clumsy
little black nigger.”

Old speckled-face leaned down and asked, “Who did it,
Viola? Was it Mary? Who did it?”

Everything was happening so fast I can’t remember
whether her action preceded her words, but I know that Mrs.
Cullinan said, “Her name’s Margaret, goddamn it, her name’s
Margaret! And she threw a wedge of the broken plate at me.



It could have been the hysteria which put her aim off, but the

flying crockery caught Miss Glory right over her ear and she
started screaming.

I left the front door wide open so all the neighbors
could hear.

Mrs. Cullinan was right about one thing. My name
wasn’t Mary.




I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



113



CHAPTER 1 7

< 5365 ,



Weekdays revolved on a sameness wheel. They turned into
themselves so steadily and inevitably that each seemed to be
the original of yesterday’s rough draft. Saturdays, however,
always broke the mold and dared to be different.

Farmers trekked into town with their children and wives
streaming around them. Their board-stiff khaki pants and
shirts revealed the painstaking care of a dutiful daughter or
wife. They often stopped at the Store to get change for bills so
they could give out jangling coins to their children, who shook
with their eagerness to get to town. The young kids openly
resented their parents’ dawdling in the Store and Uncle Willie
would call them in and spread among them bits of sweet
peanut patties that had been broken in shipping. They
gobbled down the candies and were out again, kicking up the
powdery dust in the road and worrying if there was going to
be time to get to town after all.

Bailey played mumbledypeg with the older boys around
the chinaberry tree, and Momma and Uncle Willie listened to
the farmers latest news of the country. I thought of myself as



hanging in the Store, a mote imprisoned on a shaft of sunlight.
Pushed and pulled by the slightest shift of air, but never
falling free into the tempting darkness.

In the warm months, morning began with a quick wash in
unheated well water. The suds were dashed on a plot of
ground beside the kitchen door. It was called the bait garden
(Bailey raised worms). After prayers, breakfast in summer
was usually dry cereal and fresh milk. Then to our chores
(which on Saturday included weekday jobs) — scrubbing the
floors, raking the yards, polishing our shoes for Sunday (Uncle
Willie’s had to be shined with a biscuit) and attending to the
customers who came breathlessly, also in their Saturday
hurry.

Looking through the years, I marvel that Saturday was
my favorite day in the week. What pleasures could have been
squeezed between the fan folds of unending tasks? Children’s
talent to endure stems from their ignorance of alternatives.

After our retreat from St. Louis, Momma gave us a
weekly allowance. Since she seldom dealt with money, other
than to take it in and to tithe to the church, I supposed that the
weekly ten cents was to tell us that even she realized that a
change had come over us, and that our new unfamiliarity
caused her to treat us with a strangeness.

I usually gave my money to Bailey, who went to the
movies nearly every Saturday. He brought back Street and
Smith cowboy books for me.

One Saturday Bailey was late coming back from the Rye-
al-toh. Momma had begun heating water for the Saturday-
night baths, and all the evening chores were done. Uncle
Willie sat in the twilight on the front porch mumbling or
maybe singing, and smoking a ready-made. It was quite late.
Mothers had called in their children from the group games,




114



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



115



and fading sounds of “Yah . . . Yah ... you didn’t catch me”
still hung and floated into the Store.

Uncle Willie said, “Sister, better light the light.” On Sat-
urdays we used the electric lights so that last-minute Sunday
shoppers could look down the hill and see if the Store was
open. Momma hadn t told me to turn them on because she
didn’t want to believe that night had fallen hard and Bailey
was still out in the ungodly dark.

Her apprehension was evident in the hurried movements
around the kitchen and in her lonely fearing eyes. The Black
woman in the South who raises sons, grandsons and nephews
had her heartstrings tied to a hanging noose. Any break from
routine may herald for them unbearable news. For this
reason, Southern Blacks until the present generation could be
counted among America’s arch conservatives.

Like most self-pitying people, I had very little pity for my
relatives’ anxiety. If something indeed had happened to
Bailey, Uncle Willie would always have Momma, and
Momma had the Store. Then, after all, we weren’t their chil-
dren. But I would be the major loser if Bailey turned up dead.
For he was all I claimed, if not all I had.

The bath water was steaming on the cooking stove,
but Momma was scrubbing the kitchen table for the ump-
teenth time.

“Momma,” Uncle Willie called and she jumped.
“Momma.” I waited in the bright lights of the Store, jealous
that someone had come along and told these strangers some-
thing about my brother and I would be the last to know.

Momma, why don’t you and Sister walk down to meet
him?”

To my knowledge Bailey’s name hadn’t been mentioned
for hours, but we all knew whom he meant.



Of course. Why didn t that occur to me? I wanted to be
gone. Momma said, “Wait a minute, little lady. Go get your
sweater, and bring me my shawl.”

It was darker in the road than I d thought it would be.
Momma swung the flashlight’s arc over the path and weeds
and scary tree trunks. The night suddenly became enemy ter-
ritory, and I knew that if my brother was lost in this land he
was forever lost. He was eleven and very smart, that I granted,
but after all he was so small. The Bluebeards and tigers and
Rippers could eat him up before he could scream for help.

Momma told me to take the light and she reached for my
hand. Her voice came from a high hill above me and in the
dark my hand was enclosed in hers. I loved her with a rush.
She said nothing — no “Don’t worry” or “Don’t get tender-
hearted.” Just the gentle pressure of her rough hand conveyed
her own concern and assurance to me.

We passed houses which I knew well by daylight but
couldn t recollect in the swarthy gloom.

Evening, Miz Jenkins. Walking and pulling me along.

Sister Henderson? Anything wrong?” That was from an
outline blacker than the night.

No, ma am. Not a thing. Bless the Lord.” By the time she
finished speaking we had left the worried neighbors far
behind.

Willie Williams Do Drop Inn was bright with furry
red lights in the distance and the pond’s fishy smell enveloped
us. Momma s hand tightened and let go, and I saw the small
figure plodding along, tired and old-mannish. Hands in his
pockets and head bent, he walked like a man trudging up the
hill behind a coffin.

Bailey. It jumped out as Momma said, “Ju,” and I
started to run, but her hand caught mine again and became a



116



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



117



vise. I pulled, but she yanked me back to her side. “We’ll
walk, just like we been walking, young lady.” There was no
chance to warn Bailey that he was dangerously late, that
everybody had been worried and that he should create a good
lie or, better, a great one.

Momma said, “Bailey, Junior,” and he looked up without
surprise. “You know it’s night and you just now getting
home ? ”

“Yes, ma’am.” He was empty. Where was his alibi?

“What you been doing?”

“Nothing.”

“That’s all you got to say?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“All right, young man. We’ll see when you get home.”

She had turned me loose, so I made a grab for Bailey’s
hand, but he snatched it away. I said, “Hey, Bail,” hoping to
remind him that I was his sister and his only friend, but he
grumbled something like “Leave me alone.”

Momma didn’t turn on the flashlight on the way back, nor
did she answer the questioning Good evenings that floated
around us as we passed the darkened houses.

I was confused and frightened. He was going to get a
whipping and maybe he had done something terrible. If he
couldn’t talk to me it must have been serious. But there was no
air of spent revelry about him. He just seemed sad. I didn’t
know what to think.

Uncle Willie said, “Getting too big for your britches, huh?
You can’t come home. You want to worry your grandmother
to death?” Bailey was so far away he was beyond fear. Uncle
Willie had a leather belt in his good hand but Bailey didn’t
notice or didn’t care. “I’m going to whip you this time.” Our
uncle had only whipped us once before and then only with a



peach-tree switch, so maybe now he was going to kill my
brother. I screamed and grabbed for the belt, but Momma
caught me. “Now, don’t get uppity, miss, ’less you want some
of the same thing. He got a lesson coming to him. You come
on and get your bath.”

From the kitchen I heard the belt fall down, dry and raspy
on naked skin. Uncle Willie was gasping for breath, but Bailey
made no sound. I was too afraid to splash water or even to cry
and take a chance of drowning out Bailey’s pleas for help, but
the pleas never came and the whipping was finally over.

I lay awake an eternity, waiting for a sign, a whimper or a
whisper, from the next room that he was still alive. Just before
I fell exhausted into sleep, I heard Bailey: “Now I lay me
down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep, if I should die
before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.”

My last memory of that night was the question, Why is he
saying the baby prayer? We had been saying the “Our Father,
which art in heaven” for years.

For days the Store was a strange country, and we were all
newly arrived immigrants. Bailey didn’t talk, smile or apolo-
gize. His eyes were so vacant, it seemed his soul had flown
away, and at meals I tried to give him the best pieces of meat
and the largest portion of dessert, but he turned them down.

- . Then one evening at the pig pen he said without warning,
“I saw Mother Dear.”

If he said it, it was bound to be the truth. He wouldn’t he
to me. I don’t think I asked him where or when.

“In the movies.” He laid his head on the wooden railing.
“It wasn’t really her. It was a woman named Kay Francis.
She’s a white movie star who looks just like Mother Dear.”

There was no difficulty believing that a white movie star
looked like our mother and that Bailey had seen her. He told



118



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



119



me that the movies were changed each week, but when another
picture came to Stamps staring Kay Francis he would tell me
and we’d go together. He even promised to sit with me.

He had stayed late on the previous Saturday to see the film
over again. I understood, and understood too why he couldn’t
tell Momma or Uncle Willie. She was our mother and
belonged to us. She was never mentioned to anyone because
we simply didn’t have enough of her to share.

We had to wait nearly two months before Kay Francis
returned to Stamps. Bailey’s mood had lightened consider-
ably, but he lived in a state of expectation and it made him
more nervous than he was usually. When he told me that the
movie would be shown, we went into our best behavior and
were the exemplary children that Grandmother deserved and
wished to think us.

It was a gay light comedy, and Kay Francis wore long-
sleeved white silk shirts with big cufflinks. Her bedroom was
all satin and flowers in vases, and her maid, who was Black,
went around saying “Lawsy, missy” all the time. There was a
Negro chauffeur too, who rolled his eyes and scratched his
head, and I wondered how on earth an idiot like that could be
trusted with her beautiful cars.

The whitefolks downstairs laughed every few minutes,
throwing the discarded snicker up to the Negroes in the buz-
zards’ roost. The sound would jag around in our air for an
indecisive second before the balcony’s occupants accepted it
and sent their own guffaws to riot with it against the walls of
the theater.

I laughed, too, but not at the hateful jokes made on my
people. I laughed because, except that she was white, the big
movie star looked just like my mother. Except that she lived
in a big mansion with a thousand servants, she lived just like



my mother. And it was funny to think of the whitefolks’ not
knowing that the woman they were adoring could be my
mother’s twin, except that she was white and my mother was
prettier. Much prettier.

The movie star made me happy. It was extraordinary
good fortune to be able to save up one’s money and go see
one’s mother whenever one wanted to. I bounced out of the
theater as if I’d been given an unexpected present. But Bailey
was cast down again. (I had to beg him not to stay for the next
show.) On the way home he stopped at the railroad track and
waited for the night freight train. Just before it reached the
crossing, he tore out and ran across the tracks.

I was left on the other side in hysteria. Maybe the giant
wheels were grinding his bones into a bloody mush. Maybe he
tried to catch a boxcar and got flung into the pond and
drowned. Or even worse, maybe he caught the train and was
forever gone.

When the train passed he pushed himself away from the
pole where he had been leaning, berated me for making all
that noise and said, “Let’s go home.”

One year later he did catch a freight, but because of his
youth and the inscrutable ways of fate, he didn’t find Cali-
fornia and his Mother Dear — he got stranded in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, for two weeks.






I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



121



CHAPTER 1 8





Another day was over. In the soft dark the cotton truck
spilled the pickers out and roared out of the yard with a sound
like a giant’s fart. The workers stepped around in circles for a
few seconds as if they had found themselves unexpectedly in
an unfamiliar place. Their minds sagged.

In the Store the men’s faces were the most painful to
watch, but I seemed to have no choice. When they tried to
smile to carry off their tiredness as if it was nothing, the body
did nothing to help the mind’s attempt at disguise. Their
shoulders drooped even as they laughed, and when they put
their hands on their hips in a show of jauntiness, the palms
slipped the thighs as if the pants were waxed.

Evening, Sister Henderson. Well, back where we started,
huh?”

Yes, sir, Brother Stewart. Back where you started, bless
the Lord. Momma could not take the smallest achievement for
granted. People whose history and future were threatened each
day by extinction considered that it was only by divine inter-
vention that they were able to live at all. I find it interesting that



the meanest life, the poorest existence, is attributed to God’s
will, but as human beings become more affluent, as their living
standard and style begin to ascend the material scale, God
descends the scale of responsibility at a commensurate speed.

That’s just who get the credit. Yes, ma’am. The blessed
Lord. Their overalls and shirts seemed to be torn on purpose
and the cotton lint and dust in their hair gave them the
appearance of people who had turned gray in the past few
hours.

The women s feet had swollen to fill the discarded men’s
shoes they wore, and they washed their arms at the well to dis-
lodge dirt and splinters that had accrued to them as part of the
day’s pickings.

I thought them all hateful to have allowed themselves to
be worked like oxen, and even more shameful to try to pre-
tend that things were not as bad as they were. When they
leaned too hard on the partly glass candy counter, I wanted to
tell them shortly to stand up and “assume the posture of a
man, but Momma would have beaten me if I’d opened my
mouth. She ignored the creaks of the counter under their
weight and moved around filling their orders and keeping
up a conversation. “Going to put your dinner on, Sister
Williams?” Bailey and I helped Momma, while Uncle Willie
sat on the porch and heard the day’s account.

Praise the Lord, no, ma am. Got enough left over from
last night to do us. We going home and get cleaned up to go to
the revival meeting.”

Go to church in that cloud of weariness? Not go home and
lay those tortured bones in a feather bed? The idea came to
me that my people may be a race of masochists and that not
only was it our fate to live the poorest, roughest life but that
we liked it like that.



122



MAYA ANGELOU



“I know what you mean, Sister Williams. Got to feed the
soul just like you feed the body. I’m taking the children, too,
the Lord willing. Good Book say, ‘Raise a child in the way he
should go and he will not depart from it.’ ”

“That’s what it say. Sure is what it say.”

The cloth tent had been set on the flatlands in the middle of a
field near the railroad tracks. The earth was carpeted with a
silky layer of dried grass and cotton stalks. Collapsible chairs
were poked into the still-soft ground and a large wooden
cross was hung from the center beam at the rear of the tent.
Electric lights had been strung from behind the pulpit to the
entrance flap and continued outside on poles made of rough
two-by-fours.

Approached in the dark the swaying bulbs looked lonely
and purposeless. Not as if they were there to provide light or
anything meaningful. And the tent, that blurry bright three-
dimensional A, was so foreign to the cotton field, that it might
just get up and fly away before my eyes.

People, suddenly visible in the lamplight, streamed
toward the temporary church. The adults’ voices relayed the
serious intent of their mission. Greetings' were exchanged,
hushed.

“Evening, sister, how you?”

“Bless the Lord, just trying to make it in.”

Their minds were concentrated on the coming meeting,
soul to soul, with God. This was no time to indulge in human
concerns or personal questions.

“The good Lord give me another day, and I’m thankful.”
Nothing personal in that. The credit was God’s, and there was
no illusion about the Central Position’s shifting or becoming
less than Itself.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 123

Teenagers enjoyed revivals as much as adults. They used
the night outside meetings to play at courting. The imperma-
nence of a collapsible church added to the frivolity, and their
eyes flashed and winked and the girls giggled little silver
drops in the dusk while the boys postured and swaggered and
pretended not to notice. The nearly grown girls wore skirts as
tight as the custom allowed and the young men slicked their
hair down with Moroline Hairdressing and water.

To small children, though, the idea of praising God in a
tent was confusing, to say the least. It seemed somehow blas-
phemous. The lights hanging slack overhead, the soft ground
underneath and the canvas wall that faintly blew in and
out, like cheeks puffed with air, made for the feeling of a
country fair. The nudgings and jerks and winks of the bigger
children surely didn’t belong in a church. But the tension of
the elders — their expectation, which weighted like a thick
blanket over the crowd — was the most perplexing of all.

Would the gentle Jesus care to enter into that transitory
setting? The altar wobbled and threatened to overturn and
the collection table sat at a rakish angle. One leg had yielded
itself to the loose dirt. Would God the Father allow His only
Son to mix with this crowd of cotton pickers and maids,
washerwomen and handymen? I knew He sent His spirit on
Sundays to the church, but after all that was a church and the
people had had all day Saturday to shuffle off the cloak of
work and the skin of despair.

Everyone attended the revival meetings. Members of the
hoity-toity Mount Zion Baptist Church mingled with the
intellectual members of the African Methodist Episcopal and
African Methodist Episcopal Zion, and the plain working
people of the Christian Methodist Episcopal. These gatherings



124



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



125



provided the one time in the year when all of those good vil-
lage people associated with the followers of the Church of
God in Christ. The latter were looked upon with some suspi-
cion because they were so loud and raucous in their services.
Their explanation that “the Good Book say, ‘Make a joyful
noise unto the Lord, and be exceedingly glad’ ” did not in the
least minimize the condescension of their fellow Christians.
Their church was far from the others, but they could be heard
on Sunday, a half mile away, singing and dancing until they
sometimes fell down in a dead faint. Members of the other
churches wondered if the Holy Rollers were going to heaven
after all their shouting. The suggestion was that they were
having their heaven right here on earth.

This was their annual revival.

Mrs. Duncan, a little woman with a bird face, started the
service. “I know I’m a witness for my Lord ... I know I’m a
witness for my Lord, I know I’m a witness . .

Her voice, a skinny finger, stabbed high up in the air and
the church responded. From somewhere down front came the
jangling sound of a tambourine. Two beats on “know,” two
beats on “I’m a” and two beats on the end of “witness.”

Other voices joined the near shriek of Mrs. Duncan. They
crowded around and tenderized the tone. Handclaps snapped
in the roof and solidified the beat. When the song reached its
peak in sound and passion, a tall, thin man who had been
kneeling behind the altar all the while stood up and sang with
the audience for a few bars. He stretched out his long arms
and grasped the platform. It took some time for the singers to
come off their level of exaltation, but the minister stood reso-
lute until the song unwound like a child’s playtoy and lay qui-
eted in the aisles.

“Amen.” He looked at the audience.



“Yes, sir, amen.” Nearly everyone seconded him.

“I say, Let the church say ‘Amen.’ ”

Everyone said, “Amen.”

“Thank the Lord. Thank the Lord.”

“That’s right, thank the Lord. Yes, Lord. Amen.”

“We will have prayer, led by Brother Bishop.”

Another tall, brown-skinned man wearing square glasses
walked up to the altar from the front row. The minister knelt
at the right and Brother Bishop at the left.

“Our Father”— he was singing— “You who took my feet
out the mire and clay—”

The church moaned, “Amen.”

“You who saved my soul. One day. Look, sweet Jesus.
Look down, on these your suffering children—”

The church begged, “Look down, Lord.”

“Build us up where we’re torn down . . . Bless the sick and
the afflicted . .

It was the usual prayer. Only his voice gave it something
new. After every two words he gasped and dragged the
air over his vocal chords, making a sound like an inverted
grunt. “You who”— grunt— “saved my”— gasp- — “soul one”
—inhalation— “day” — humph.

Then the congregation, led again by Mrs. Duncan, flew
into “Precious Lord, take my hand, lead me on, let me stand.”
It was sung at a faster clip than the usual one in the C.M.E.
Church, but at that tempo it worked. There was a joy about
the tune that changed the meaning of its sad lyrics. “When the
darkness appears, and the night draweth near and my life is
almost gone . . There seemed to be an abandon which sug-
gested that with all those things it should be a time for great
rejoicing.

The serious shouters had already made themselves known,



126



MAYA ANGELOU



and their fans (cardboard advertisements from Texarkana’s
largest Negro funeral home) and lacy white handkerchiefs
waved high in the air. In their dark hands they looked like
small kites without the wooden frames.

The tall minister stood again at the altar. He waited for
the song and the revelry to die.

He said, “Amen. Glory.”

The church skidded off the song slowly. “Amen. Glory.”

He still waited, as the last notes remained in the air, stair-
cased on top of each other. “At the river I stand — ” “I stand,
guide my feet- — ” “Guide my feet, take my hand.” Sung like
the last circle in a round. Then quiet descended.

The Scripture reading was from Matthew, twenty-fifth
chapter, thirtieth verse through the forty-sixth.

His text for the sermon was “The least of these.”

After reading the verses to the accompaniment of a few
Amens he said, “First Corinthians tells me, ‘Even if I have the
tongue of men and of angels and have not charity, I am as
nothing. Even if I give all my clothes to the poor and have not
charity, I am as nothing. Even if I give my body to be burned
and have not charity it availeth me nothing. Burned, I say, and
have not charity, it availeth nothing.’ I have to ask myself,
what is this thing called Charity? If good deeds are not
charity — ”

The church gave in quickly. “That’s right, Lord.”

“ — if giving my flesh and blood is not charity?”

“Yes, Lord.”

“I have to ask myself what is this charity they talking so
much about.”

I had never heard a preacher jump into the muscle of his
sermon so quickly. Already the humming pitch had risen in
the church, and those who knew had popped their eyes in



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



127



anticipation of the coming excitement. Momma sat tree-trunk
still, but she had balled her handkerchief in her hand and only
the corner, which I had embroidered, stuck out.

“As I understand it, charity vaunteth not itself. Is not
puffed up.” He blew himself up with a deep breath to give us
the picture of what Charity was not. “Charity don’t go around
saying ‘I give you food and I give you clothes and by rights
you ought to thank me.’ ”

The congregation knew whom he was talking about and
voiced agreement with his analysis. “Tell the truth, Lord.”
“Charity don’t say, ‘Because I give you a job, you got to
bend your knee to me.’ ” The church was rocking with each
phrase. “It don’t say, ‘Because I pays you what you due, you
got to call me master.’ It don’t ask me to humble myself and
belittle myself. That ain’t what Charity is.”

Down front to the right, Mr. and Mrs. Stewart, who only a
few hours earlier had crumbled in our front yard, defeated by
cotton rows, now sat on the edges of their rickety-rackety
chairs. Their faces shone with the delight of their souls. The
mean whitefolks was going to get their comeuppance. Wasn’t
that what the minister said, and wasn’t he quoting from the
words of God Himself? They had been refreshed with the
hope of revenge and the promise of justice.

“Aaagh. Raagh. I said . . . Charity. Woooooo, a Charity. It
don’t want nothing for itself. It don’t want to be bossman . . .
Waah ... It don’t want to be headman . . . Waah ... It don’t
want to be foreman . . . Waah ... It ... I’m talking about
Charity ... It don’t want . . . Oh Lord . . . help me tonight . . .
It don’t want to be bowed to and scraped at . . .”

America’s historic bowers and scrapers shifted easily and
happily in the makeshift church. Reassured that although
they might be the lowest of the low they were at least not



128



MAYA ANGELOU



i KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



129



uncharitable, and in that great Gettin' Up Morning, Jesus
was going to separate the sheep (them) from the goats (the
whitefolks).”

Charity is simple.” The church agreed, vocally.

Charity is poor.” That was us he was talking about.

Charity is plain.” I thought, that’s about right. Plain and
simple.

“Charity is . . . Oh, Oh, Oh. Cha-ri-ty. Where are you?
Wooo . . . Charity . . . Hump.”

One chair gave way and the sound of splintering wood
split the air in the rear of the church.

I call you and you don’t answer. Woooh, oh Charity.”

Another holler went up in front of me, and a large woman
flopped over, her arms above her head like a candidate for
baptism. The emotional release was contagious. Little screams
burst around the room like Fourth of July firecrackers.

The minister s voice was a pendulum. Swinging left and
down and right and down and left and — “How can you claim
to be my brother, and hate me? Is that Charity? How can you
claim to be my sister and despise me? Is that supposed to be
Charity? How can you claim to be my friend and misuse and
wrongfully abuse me? Is that Charity? Oh, my children, I
stopped by here — ”

The church swung on the end of his phrases. Punctuating.
Confirming. “Stop by here, Lord.”

" — to te H you, to open your heart and let Charity reign.
Forgive your enemies for His sake. Show the Charity that
Jesus was speaking of to this sick old world. It has need of the
charitable giver.” His voice was falling and the explosions
became fewer and quieter.

‘And now I repeat the words of the Apostle Paul, and



‘now abideth faith, hope and charity, these three; but the
greatest of these is charity.’ ”

The congregation lowed with satisfaction. Even if they
were society s pariahs, they were going to be angels in a
marble white heaven and sit on the right hand of Jesus, the
son of God. The Lord loved the poor and hated those cast
high in the world. Hadn’t He Himself said it would be easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich
man to enter heaven? They were assured that they were going
to be the only inhabitants of that land of milk and honey,
except of course a few whitefolks like John Brown who his-
tory books said was crazy anyway. All the Negroes had to do
generally, and those at the revival especially, was bear up
under this life of toil and cares, because a blessed home
awaited them in the far-off bye and bye.

Bye and bye, when the morning come, when all the saints
of God’s are gathering home, we will tell the story of how we
overcome and we’ll understand it better bye and bye.”

A few people who had fainted were being revived on the
side aisles when the evangelist opened the doors of the church.
Over the sounds of “Thank you, Jesus,” he started a long-
meter hymn:

“I came to Jesus, as I was,
worried, wounded and sad,

I found in Him a resting place,

And He has made me glad.”

The old ladies took up the hymn and shared it in tight har-
mony. The humming crowd began to sound like tired bees,
restless and anxious to get home.

All those under the sound of my voice who have no spin-




130 MAYA ANGELOU

tual home, whose hearts are burdened and heavy-ladened, let
them come. Come before it s too late. I don’t ask you to join
the Church of God in Christ. No. I’m a servant of God, and
in this revival, we are out to bring straying souls to Him. So if
you join this evening, just say which church you want to be
affiliated with, and we will turn you over to a representative
of that church body. Will one deacon of the following
churches come forward?”

That was revolutionary action. No one had ever heard of a
minister taking in members for another church. It was our
first look at Charity among preachers. Men from the A.M.E.,
A.M.E.Z., Baptist and C.M.E. churches went down front and
assumed stances a few feet apart. Converted sinners flowed
down the aisles to shake hands with the evangelist and stayed
at his side or were directed to one of the men in line. Over
twenty people were saved that night.

There was nearly as much commotion over the saving of
the sinners as there had been during the gratifying melodic
sermon.

The Mothers of the Church, old ladies with white lace
disks pinned to their thinning hair, had a service all their own.
They walked around the new converts singing,

“Before this time another year,

I may be gone,

In some lonesome graveyard,

Oh, Lord, how long?”

When the collection was taken up and the last hymn given to
the praise of God, the evangelist asked that everyone in his
presence rededicate his soul to God and his life’s work to
Charity. Then we were dismissed.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 131

Outside and on the way home, the people played in their
magic, as children poke in mud pies, reluctant to tell them-
selves that the game was over.

“The Lord touched him tonight, didn’t He?”

“Surely did. Touched him with a mighty fire.”

‘Bless the Lord. I’m glad I’m saved.”

"That’s the truth. It make a whole lot of difference.”

“I wish them people I works for could of heard that
sermon. They don’t know what they letting theyselves in for.”
“Bible say, ‘He who can hear, let him hear. He who can’t,
shame on ’em.’ ”

They basked in the righteousness of the poor and the
exclusiveness of the downtrodden. Let the whitefolks have
their money and power and segregation and sarcasm and big
houses and schools and lawns like carpets, and books, and
mostly — mostly — let them have their whiteness. It was better
to be meek and lowly, spat upon and abused for this little time
than to spend eternity frying in the fires of hell. No one would
have admitted that the Christian and charitable people were
happy to think of their oppressors’ turning forever on the
Devil’s spit over the flames of fire and brimstone.

But that was what the Bible said and it didn’t make mis-
takes. “Ain’t it said somewhere in there that ‘before one word
of this changes, heaven and earth shall fall away?’ Folks going
to get what they deserved.”

When the main crowd of worshipers reached the short
bridge spanning the pond, the ragged sound of honky-tonk
music assailed them. A barrelhouse blues was being shouted
over the stamping of feet on a wooden floor. Miss Grace, the
good-time woman, had her usual Saturday-night customers.
The big white house blazed with lights and noise. The people
inside had forsaken their own distress for a little while.



132



MAYA ANGELOU



Passing near the din, the godly people dropped their heads
and conversation ceased. Reality began its tedious crawl back
into their reasoning. After all, they were needy and hungry and
despised and dispossessed, and sinners the world over were in
the driver’s seat. How long, merciful Father? How long?

A stranger to the music could not have made a distinction
between the songs sung a few minutes before and those being
danced to in the gay house by the railroad tracks. All asked
the same questions. How long, oh God? How long?



CHAPTER 19

.mss>



The last inch of space was filled, yet people continued to
wedge themselves along the walls of the Store. Uncle Willie
had turned the radio up to its last notch so that youngsters on
the porch wouldn’t miss a word. Women sat on kitchen
chairs, dining-room chairs, stools and upturned wooden
boxes. Small children and babies perched on every lap avail-
able and men leaned on the shelves or on each other.

The apprehensive mood was shot through with shafts of
gaiety, as a black sky is streaked with lightning.

“I ain’t worried ’bout this fight. Joe’s gonna whip that
cracker like it’s open season.”

“He gone whip him till that white boy call him Momma.”
At last the talking was finished and the string-along songs
about razor blades were over and the fight began.

“A quick jab to the head.” In the Store the crowd grunted.
“A left to the head and a right and another left.” One of the
listeners cackled like a hen and was quieted.

“They’re in a clench, Louis is trying to fight his way out.”



I



134



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



135



Some bitter comedian on the porch said, “That white man
don’t mind hugging that niggah now, I betcha.”

“The referee is moving in to break them up, but Louis
finally pushed the contender away and it’s an uppercut to the
chin. The contender is hanging on, now he’s backing away.
Louis catches him with a short left to the jaw.”

A tide of murmuring assent poured out the doors and into
the yard.

“Another left and another left. Louis is saving that mighty
right . . .” The mutter in the Store had grown into a baby roar
and it was pierced by the clang of a bell and the announcer’s
“That’s the bell for round three, ladies and gentlemen.”

As I pushed my way into the Store I wondered if the
announcer gave any thought to the fact that he was addressing
as “ladies and gentlemen” all the Negroes around the world
who sat sweating and praying, glued to their “master’s voice.”
There were only a few calls for R. C. Colas, Dr. Peppers,
and Hire’s root beer. The real festivities would begin after the
fight. Then even the old Christian ladies who taught their
children and tried themselves to practice turning the other
cheek would buy soft drinks, and if the Brown Bomber’s vic-
tory was a particularly bloody one they would order peanut
patties and Baby Ruths also.

Bailey and I lay the coins on top of the cash register. Uncle
Willie didn’t allow us to ring up sales during a fight. It was too
noisy and might shake up the atmosphere. When the gong
rang for the next round we pushed through the near-sacred
quiet to the herd of children outside.

“He’s got Louis against the ropes and now it’s a left to the
body and a right to the ribs. Another right to the body, it looks
like it was low . . . Yes, ladies and gentlemen, the referee is
signaling but the contender keeps raining the blows on Louis.



It’s another to the body, and it looks like Louis is going
down.”

My race groaned. It was our people falling. It was another
lynching, yet another Black man hanging on a tree. One more
woman ambushed and raped. A Black boy whipped and
maimed. It was hounds on the trail of a man running through
slimy swamps. It was a white woman slapping her maid for
being forgetful.

The men in the Store stood away from the walls and at
attention. Women greedily clutched the babes on their laps
while on the porch the shufflings and smiles, flirtings and
pinching of a few minutes before were gone. This might be
the end of the world. If Joe lost we were back in slavery and
beyond help. It would all be true, the accusations that we were
lower types of human beings. Only a little higher than the
apes. True that we were stupid and ugly and lazy and dirty
and, unlucky and worst of all, that God Himself hated us and
ordained us to be hewers of wood and drawers of water, for-
ever and ever, world without end.

We didn’t breathe. We didn’t hope. We waited.

“He’s off the ropes, ladies and gentlemen. He’s moving
towards the center of the ring.” There was no time to be
relieved. The worst might still happen.

“And now it looks like Joe is mad. He’s caught Camera
with a left hook to the head and a right to the head. It’s a left jab
to the body and another left to the head. There’s a left cross and
a right to the head. The contender’s right eye is bleeding and he
can’t seem to keep his block up. Louis is penetrating every
block. The referee is moving in, but Louis sends a left to the
body and it’s the uppercut to the chin and the contender is drop-
ping. He’s on the canvas, ladies and gentlemen.”



136



MAYA ANGELOU



Babies slid to the floor as women stood up and men leaned
toward the radio.

“Here’s the referee. He’s counting. One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven ... Is the contender trying to get up again?”

All the men in the store shouted, “NO.”

“ — eight, nine, ten.” There were a few sounds from the
audience, but they seemed to be holding themselves in against
tremendous pressure.

“The fight is all over, ladies and gentlemen. Let’s get the
microphone over to the referee . . . Here he is. He’s got the
Brown Bomber’s hand, he’s holding it up . . . Here he is . . .”
Then the voice, husky and familiar, came to wash over
us The winnah, and still heavyweight champeen of the
world . . . Joe Louis.”

Champion of the world. A Black boy. Some Black
mother’s son. He was the strongest man in the world. People
drank Coca-Colas like ambrosia and ate candy bars like
Christmas. Some of the men went behind the Store and
poured white lightning in their soft-drink bottles, and a few
of the bigger boys followed them. Those who were not chased
away came back blowing their breath in front of themselves
like proud smokers.

It would take an hour or more before the people would
leave the Store and head for home. Those who lived too far
had made arrangements to stay in town. It wouldn’t do for a
Black man and his family to be caught on a lonely country
road on a night when Joe Louis had proved that we were the
strongest people in the world.



CHAPTER 20

^ 0 -



“Acka Backa, Sody Cracka
Acka Backa, Boo
Acka Backa, Sody Cracka
I’m in love with you.”

The sounds of tag beat through the trees while the top
branches waved in contrapuntal rhythms. I lay on a moment
of green grass and telescoped the children’s game to my vision.
The girls ran about wild, now here, now there, never here,
never was, they seemed to have no more direction than a
splattered egg. But it was a shared if seldom voiced knowl-
edge that all movements fitted, and worked according to a
larger plan. I raised a platform for my mind’s eye and mar-
veled down on the outcome of “Acka Backa.” The gay picnic
dresses dashed, stopped and darted like beautiful dragonflies
over a dark pool. The boys, black whips in the sunlight,
popped behind the trees where their girls had fled, half
hidden and throbbing in the shadows.

The summer picnic fish fry in the clearing by the pond




138



MAYA ANGELOU



was the biggest outdoor event of the year. Everyone was
there. All churches were represented, as well as the social
groups (Elks, Eastern Star, Masons, Knights of Columbus,
Daughters of Pythias), professional people (Negro teachers
from Lafayette County) and all the excited children.

Musicians brought cigar-box guitars, harmonicas, juice
harps, combs wrapped in tissue paper and even bathtub
basses.

The amount and variety of foods would have found
approval on the menu of a Roman epicure. Pans of fried
chicken, covered with dishtowels, sat under benches next to a
mountain of potato salad crammed with hard-boiled eggs.
Whole rust-red sticks ot bologna were clothed in cheese-cloth.
Homemade pickles and chow-chow, and baked country
hams, aromatic with cloves and pineapples, vied for promi-
nence. Our steady customers had ordered cold watermelons,
so Bailey and I chugged the striped-green fruit into the Coca-
Cola box and filled all the tubs with ice as well as the big black
wash pot that Momma used to boil her laundry. Now they too
lay sweating in the happy afternoon air.

The summer picnic gave ladies a chance to show off their
baking hands. On the barbecue pit, chickens and spareribs
sputtered in their own fat and a sauce whose recipe was
guarded in the family like a scandalous affair. However, in
the ecumenical light of the summer picnic every true baking
artist could reveal her prize to the delight and criticism of the
town. Orange sponge cakes and dark brown mounds dripping
Hershey s chocolate stood layer to layer with ice-white
coconuts and light brown caramels. Pound cakes sagged with
their buttery weight and small children could no more resist
licking the icings than their mothers could avoid slapping the
sticky fingers.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



139



Proven fishermen and weekend amateurs sat on the
trunks of trees at the pond. They pulled the struggling bass
and the silver perch from the swift water. A rotating crew of
young girls scaled and cleaned the catch and busy women in
starched aprons salted and rolled the fish in corn meal, then
dropped them in Dutch ovens trembling with boiling fat.

On one corner of the clearing a gospel group was
rehearsing. Their harmony, packed as tight as sardines,
floated over the music of the county singers and melted into
the songs of the small children’s ring games.

Boys, don’chew let that ball fall on none of my cakes, you
do and it’ll be me on you.”

Yes, ma am, and nothing changed. The boys continued
hitting the tennis ball with pailings snatched from a fence and
running holes in the ground, colliding with everyone.

I had wanted to bring something to read, but Momma
said if I didn’t want to play with the other children I could
make myself useful by cleaning fish or bringing water from
the nearest well or wood for the barbecue.

I wandered into a retreat by accident. Signs with arrows
around the barbecue pit pointed men, women, children
toward fading lanes, grown over since last year. Feeling ages
old and very wise at ten, I couldn’t allow myself to be found by
small children squatting behind a tree. Neither did I have the
nerve to follow the arrow pointing the way for women. If any
grownup had caught me there, it was possible that she’d think
I was being “womanish” and would report me to Momma,
and I knew what I could expect from her. So when the urge
hit me to relieve myself, I headed toward another direction.
Once through the wall of sycamore trees I found myself in a
clearing ten times smaller than the picnic area, and cool and
quiet. After my business was taken care of, I found a seat



140



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



141



between two protruding roots of a black walnut tree and
leaned back on its trunk. Heaven would be like that for the
deserving. Maybe California too. Looking straight up at the
uneven circle of sky, I began to sense that I might be falling
into a blue cloud, far away. The children’s voices and the thick
odor of food cooking over open fire were the hooks I grabbed
just in time to save myself.

Grass squeaked and I jumped at being found. Louise
Kendricks walked into my grove. I didn’t know that she too
was escaping the gay spirit. We were the same age and she and
her mother lived in a neat little bungalow behind the school.
Her cousins, who were in our age group, were wealthier and
fairer, but I had secretly believed Louise to be the prettiest
female in Stamps, next to Mrs. Flowers.

“What you doing sitting here by yourself. Marguerite?”
She didn’t accuse, she asked for information. I said that I was
watching the sky. She asked, “What for?” There was obvi-
ously no answer to a question like that, so I didn’t make up
one. Louise reminded me of Jane Eyre. Her mother lived in
reduced circumstances, but she was genteel, and though she
worked as a maid I decided she should be called a governess
and did so to Bailey and myself. (Who could teach a romantic
dreamy ten-year-old to call a spade a spade?) Mrs. Kend-
ricks could not have been very old, but to me all people over
eighteen were adults and there could be no degree given or
taken. They had to be catered to and pampered with polite-
ness, then they had to stay in the same category of lookalike,
soundalike and beingalike. Louise was a lonely girl, although
she had plenty of playmates and was a ready partner for any
ring game in the schoolyard.

Her face, which was long and dark chocolate brown, had
a thin sheet of sadness over it, as light but as permanent as the



viewing gauze on a coffin. And her eyes, which I thought her
best feature, shifted quickly as if what they sought had just a
second before eluded her.

She had come near and the spotted light through the trees
fell on her face and braids in running splotches. I had never
noticed before, but she looked exactly like Bailey. Her hair
was “good” — more straight than kinky— and her features had
the regularity of objects placed by a careful hand.

She looked up — “Well, you can’t see much sky from
here.” Then she sat down, an arm away from me. Finding two
exposed roots, she laid thin wrists on them as if she had been
in an easy chair. Slowly she leaned back against the tree. I
closed my eyes and thought of the necessity of finding another
place and the unlikehood of there being another with all the
qualifications that this one had. There was a little peal of a
scream and before I could open my eyes Louise had grabbed
my hand. “I was falling”— she shook her long braids — “I was
falling in the sky.”

I liked her for being able to fall in the sky and admit it. I
suggested, “Let’s try together. But we have to sit up straight
on the count of five.” Louise asked, “Want to hold hands? Just
in case?” I did. If one of us did happen to fall, the other could
pull her out.

After a few near tumbles into eternity (both of us knew
what it was), we laughed at having played with death and
destruction and escaped.

Louise said, “Let’s look at that old sky while we’re spin-
ning.” We took each other’s hands in the center of the clearing
and began turning around. Very slowly at first. We raised our
chins and looked straight at the seductive patch of blue.
Faster, just a little faster, then faster, faster yet. Yes, help, we
were falling. Then eternity won, after all. We couldn’t stop



142



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



143



spinning or falling until I was jerked out of her grasp by
greedy gravity and thrown to my fate below — no, above, not
below. I found myself safe and dizzy at the foot of the
sycamore tree. Louise had ended on her knees at the other side
of the grove.

This was surely the time to laugh. We lost but we hadn’t
lost anything. First we were giggling and crawling drunkenly
toward each other and then we were laughing out loud
uproariously. We slapped each other on the back and shoul-
ders and laughed some more. We had made a fool or a liar out
of something, and didn’t that just beat all?

In daring to challenge the unknown with me, she became
my first friend. We spent tedious hours teaching ourselves the
Tut language. You (Yak oh you) know (kack nug oh wug)
what (wack hash a tut). Since all the other children spoke Pig
Latin, we were superior because Tut was hard to speak and
even harder to understand. At last I began to comprehend
what girls giggled about. Louise would rattle of a few sen-
tences to me in the unintelligible Tut language and would
laugh. Naturally I laughed too. Snickered, really, under-
standing nothing. I don’t think she understood half of what
she was saying herself, but, after all, girls have to giggle, and
after being a woman for three years I was about to become
a girl.

I N school one day, a girl whom I barely knew and had scarcely
spoken to brought me a note. The intricate fold indicated that
it was a love note. I was sure she had the wrong person, but
she insisted. Picking the paper loose, I confessed to myself that
I was frightened. Suppose it was somebody being funny? Sup-
pose the paper would show a hideous beast and the word
YOU written over it. Children did that sometimes just



because they claimed I was stuck-up. Fortunately I had got
permission to go to the toilet — an outside job — and in the
reeking gloom I read:

Dear Friend, M.J.

Times are hard and friends are few
I take great pleasure in writing you
Will you be my Valentine?

Tommy Valdon

I pulled my mind apart. Who? Who was Tommy Valdon?
Finally a face dragged itself from my memory. He was the
nice-looking brown-skinned boy who lived across the pond.
As soon as I had pinned him down, I began to wonder, Why?
Why me? Was it a joke? But if Tommy was the boy I remem-
bered he was a very sober person and a good student. Well,
then, it wasn’t a joke. All right, what evil dirty things did he
have in mind? My questions fell over themselves, an army in
retreat. Haste, dig for cover. Protect your flanks. Don’t let the
enemy close the gap between you. What did a Valentine do,
anyway?

Starting to throw the paper in the foul-smelling hole, I
thought of Louise. I could show it to her. I folded the paper
back in the original creases, and went back to class. There was
no time during the lunch period since I had to run to the Store
and wait on customers. The note was in my sock and every
time Momma looked at me, I feared that her church gaze
might have turned into X-ray vision and she could not only
see the note and read its message but would interpret it as
well. I felt myself slipping down a sheer cliff of guilt, and a



144



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



145



second time I nearly destroyed the note but there was no
opportunity. The take-up bell rang and Bailey raced me to
school, so the note was forgotten. But serious business is
serious, and it had to be attended to. After classes I waited for
Louise. She was talking to a group of girls, laughing. But
when I gave her our signal (two waves of the left hand) she
said good-bye to them and joined me in the road. I didn’t give
her the chance to ask what was on my mind (her favorite
question); I simply gave her the note. Recognizing the fold she
stopped smiling. We were in deep waters. She opened the
letter and read it aloud twice. “Well, what do you think?”

I said, What do I think? That’s what I’m asking you?
What is there to think?”

“Looks like he wants you to be his valentine.”

“Louise, I can read. But what does it mean?”

“Oh, you know. His valentine. His love.”

There was that hateful word again. That treacherous
word that yawned up at you like a volcano.

Well, I won t. Most decidedly I won’t. Not ever again.”
Have you been his valentine before? WLat do you mean
never again?”

I couldn t lie to my friend and I wasn’t about to freshen
old ghosts.

“Well, don’t answer him then, and that’s the end of it.” I
was a little relieved that she thought it could be gotten rid of
so quickly. I tore the note in half and gave her a part. Walking
down the hill we minced the paper in a thousand shreds and
gave it to the wind.

Two days later a monitor came into my classroom. She
spoke quietly to Miss Williams, our teacher. Miss Williams
said, “Class, I believe you remember that tomorrow is Valen-
tine s Day, so named for St. Valentine, the martyr, who died



around A.D. 270 in Rome. The day is observed by exchanging
tokens of affection, and cards. The eight-grade children have
completed theirs and the monitor is acting as mailman. You
will be given cardboard, ribbon and red tissue paper during
the last period today so that you may make your gifts. Glue
and scissors are here at the work table. Now, stand when your
name is called.”

She had been shuffling the colored envelopes and calling
names for some time before I noticed. I had been thinking of
yesterday s plain invitation and the expeditious way Louise
and I took care of it.

We who were being called to receive valentines were only
slightly more embarrassed than those who sat and watched as
Miss Williams opened each envelope. “Helen Gray.” Helen
Gray, a tall, dull girl from Louisville, flinched. “Dear Valen-
ti ne ” — Miss Williams began reading the badly rhymed
childish drivel. I seethed with shame and anticipation and yet
had time to be offended at the silly poetry that I could have
bettered in my sleep.

Margue-you-reete Ann Johnson. My goodness, this looks
more like a letter than a valentine. ’Dear Friend, I wrote you a
letter and saw you tear it up with your friend Miss L. I don’t
believe you meant to hurt my feelings so whether you answer
or not you will always be my valentine. T.V.’ ”

Class Miss Williams smirked and continued lazily
without giving us permission to sit down — “although you are
only in the seventh grade, I’m sure you wouldn’t be so pre-
sumptuous as to sign a letter with an initial. But here is a boy
in the eight grade, about to graduate — blah, blah, blooey,
blah. You may collect your valentines and these letters on your
way out.”

It was a nice letter and Tommy had beautiful penmanship.



146



MAYA ANGELOU



I was sorry I tore up the first. His statement that whether
I answered him or not would not influence his affection
reassured me. He couldn’t be after you-know-what if he talked
like that. I told Louise that the next time he came to the Store I
was going to say something extra nice to him. Unfortunately
the situation was so wonderful to me that each time I saw
Tommy I melted in delicious giggles and was unable to form a
coherent sentence. After a while he stopped including me in
his general glances.



CHAPTER 2 1




Bailey stuck branches in the ground behind the house and
covered them with a worn-through blanket, making a tent. It
was to be his Captain Marvel hideaway. There he initiated
girls into the mysteries of sex. One by one, he took the
impressed, the curious, the adventurous into the gray shadows,
after explaining that they were going to play Momma and
Poppa. I was assigned the role of Baby and lookout. The girls
were commanded to pull up their dresses and then he lay on
top and wiggled his hips.

I sometimes had to lift the flap (our signal that an adult
was approaching) and so I saw their pathetic struggles even as
they talked about school and the movies.

He had been playing the game for about six months before
he met Joyce. She was a country girl about four years older
than Bailey (he wasn’t quite eleven when they met) whose
parents had died and she along with her brothers and sisters
had been parceled out to relatives. Joyce had come to Stamps
to live with a widowed aunt who was even poorer than the
poorest person in town. Joyce was quite advanced physically




148



MAYA ANG ELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



149



for her age. Her breasts were not the hard little knots of other
girls her age; they filled out the tops of her skimpy little
dresses. She walked stiffly, as if she were carrying a load
of wood between her legs. I thought of her as being coarse,
but Bailey said she was cute and that he wanted to play house
with her.

In the special way of women, Joyce knew she had made a
conquest, and managed to hang around the Store in the late
afternoons and all day Saturdays. She ran errands for Momma
when we were busy in the Store and sweated profusely. Often
when she came in after running down the hill, her cotton
dress would cling to her thin body and Bailey would glue his
eyes on her until her clothes dried.

Momma gave her small gifts of food to take to her aunt,
and on Saturdays Uncle Willie would sometimes give her a
dime for “show fare.”

During Passover week we weren’t allowed to go to the
movies (Momma said we all must sacrifice to purify our souls),
and Bailey and Joyce decided that the three of us would play
house. As usual, I was to be Baby.

He strung the tent and Joyce crawled in first. Bailey told
me to sit outside and play with my doll baby, and he went in
and the flap closed.

“Well, ain’t you going to open your trousers?” Joyce’s
voice was muffled.

“No. You just pull up your dress.”

There were rustling sounds from the tent and the sides
pooched out as if they were trying to stand up.

Bailey asked, “What are you doing?”

“Pulling off my drawers.”

“What for?”

“We can’t do it with my drawers on.”



“Why not?”

“How are you going to get to it?”

Silence. My poor brother didn’t know what she meant. I
knew. I lifted the flap and said, “Joyce, don’t you do that to my
brother.” She nearly screamed, but she kept her voice low,
“Margaret, you close that door.” Bailey added, “Yes. Close it.
You’re supposed to be playing with our doll baby.” I thought
he would go to the hospital if he let her do that to him, so I
warned him, “Bailey, if you let her do that to you, you’ll be
sorry.” But he threatened that if I didn’t close the door he
wouldn’t speak to me for a month, so I let the end of the
blanket fall and sat down on the grass in front of the tent.

Joyce poked her head out and said in a sugary, white -
woman-in-the-movies voice, “Baby, you go get some wood.
Daddy and I going to light a fire, then I’m going to make you
some cake.” Then her voice changed as if she was going to hit
me. “Go. Git.”

Bailey told me after that Joyce had hairs on her thing and
that she had gotten them from “doing it” with so many boys.
She even had hair under her arms. Both of them. He was very
proud of her accomplishments.

As their love affair progressed, his stealing from the Store
increased. We had always taken candy and a few nickels and
of course the sour pickles, but Bailey, now called upon to feed
Joyce’s ravening hunger, took cans of sardines and greasy
Polish sausage and cheese and even the expensive cans of pink
salmon that our family could seldom afford to eat.

Joyce’s willingness to do odd jobs slackened about this
time. She complained that she wasn’t feeling all that well. But
since she now had a few coins, she still hung around the Store
eating Planter’s peanuts and drinking Dr. Pepper.

Momma ran her off a few times. “Ain’t you said you



150



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



151



wasn’t feeling well, Joyce? Hadn’t you better get home and let
your aunty do something for you?”

“Yes, ma’am.” Then reluctantly she was off the porch, her
stiff-legged walk carrying her up the hill and out of sight.

I think she was Bailey’s first love outside the family. For
him, she was the mother who let him get as close as he
dreamed, the sister who wasn’t moody and withdrawing, and
teary and tender-hearted. All he had to do was keep the food
coming in and she kept the affection flowing. It made no dif-
ference to him that she was almost a woman, or possibly it was
just that difference which made her so appealing

She was around for a few months, and as she had
appeared, out of limbo, so she disappeared into nothingness.
There was no gossip about her, no clues to her leaving or her
whereabouts. I noticed the change in Bailey before I discov-
ered that she was gone. He lost his interest in everything. He
mulled around and it would be safe to say “he paled.”
Momma noticed and said that he was feeling poorly because
of the change in seasons (we were nearing fall), so she went to
the woods for certain leaves, made him a tea and forced him to
drink it after a heaping spoonful of sulfur and molasses. The
fact that he didn’t fight it, didn’t try to talk his way out of
taking the medicine, showed without a glimmer of doubt he
was very sick.

If I had disliked Joyce while she had Bailey in her grasp, I
hated her for leaving. I missed the tolerance she had brought
to him (he had nearly given up sarcasm and playing jokes on
the country people) and he had taken to telling me his secrets
again. But now that she was gone he rivaled me in being
uncommunicative. He closed in upon himself like a pond
swallowing a stone. There was no evidence that he had ever



opened up, and when I mentioned her he responded with
“Joyce who?”

Months later, when Momma was waiting on Joyce’s aunt,
she said, “Yes ma’am, Mrs. Goodman, life’s just one thing
right after the other.”

Mrs. Goodman was leaning on the red Coca-Cola box.

That’s the blessed truth, Sister Henderson.” She sipped the
expensive drink.

“Things change so fast, it make your head swim.”

That was Momma’s way of opening up a conversation. I
stayed mouse-quiet so that I’d be able to hear the gossip and
take it to Bailey.

“Now, you take little Joyce. She used to be around the
Store all the time. Then she went up just like smoke. We ain’t
seed hide nor hair of her in months.”

“No’m. I shamed to tell you . . . what took her off.” She
settled in on a kitchen chair. Momma spied me in the
shadows. “Sister, the Lord don’t like little jugs with big ears.
You ain’t got something to do, I’ll find something for you.”

The truth had to float to me through the kitchen door.

“I ain’t got much, Sister Henderson, but I give that child
all I had.”

Momma said she bound that was true. She wouldn’t say
“bet.”

“And after all I did, she run off with one of those railroad
porters. She was loose just like her mammy before her. You
know how they say ‘blood will tell’?”

Momma asked, “How did the snake catch her?”

“Well, now, understand me, Sister Henderson, I don’t
hold this against you, I knows you a God-fearing woman. But
it seems like she met him here.”




152



MAYA ANGELOU



Momma was flustered. Such goings on at the Store? She
asked, “At the Store?”

“Yes, ma’am. ’Member when that bunch of Elks come
over for their baseball game?” (Momma must have remem-
bered. I did.) “Well, as it turned out, he was one of them. She
left me a teenincy note. Said people in Stamps thought they
were better than she was, and that she hadn’t only made one
friend, and that was your grandson. Said she was moving to
Dallas, Texas, and gone marry that railroad porter.”

Momma said, “Do, Lord.”

Mrs. Goodman said, “You know, Sister Henderson, she
wasn’t with me long enough for me to get the real habit of her,
but still I miss her. She was sweet when she wanted to be.”
Momma consoled her with, “Well, we got to keep our mind
on the works of the Book. It say, ‘The Lord giveth and the
Lord taketh away.’ ”

Mrs. Goodman chimed in and they finished the phrase
together, “Blessed be the name of the Lord.”

I don t know how long Bailey had known about Joyce, but
later in the evening when I tried to bring her name into con-
versation, he said, “Joyce? She’s got somebody to do it to her
all the time now.” And that was the last time her name was
mentioned.



CHAPTER 22





The wind blew over the roof and ruffled the shingles. It
whistled sharp under the closed door. The chimney made
fearful sounds of protest as it was invaded by the urgent gusts.

A mile away ole Kansas City Kate (the train much
admired but too important to stop in Stamps) crashed through
the middle of town, blew its wooo-wee warnings, and con-
tinued to an unknown glamorous destination without look-
ing back.

There was going to be a storm and it was a perfect night
for rereading Jane Eyre. Bailey had finished his chores and was
already behind the stove with Mark Twain. It was my turn to
close the Store, and my book, half read, lay on the candy
counter. Since the weather was going to be bad I was sure
Uncle Willie would agree, in fact, encourage me to close early
(save electricity) and join the family in Momma’s bedroom,
which functioned as our sitting room. Few people would be
out in weather that threatened a tornado (for though the wind
blew, the sky was as clear and still as a summer morning).
Momma agreed that I might as well close, and I went out on



154



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



155



the porch, closed the shutters, slipped the wooden bar over the
door and turned off the light.

Pots rattled in the kitchen where Momma was frying corn
cakes to go with vegetable soup for supper, and the homey
sounds and scents cushioned me as I read of Jane Eyre in the
cold English mansion of a colder English gentleman. Uncle
Willie was engrossed in the Almanac , his nightly reading, and
my brother was far away on a raft on the Mississippi.

I was the first to hear the rattle on the back door. A rattle
and knock, a knock and rattle. But suspecting that it might
have been the mad wife in the tower, I didn’t credit it. Then
Uncle Willie heard it and summoned Bailey back from Huck
Finn to unlatch the bolt.

Through the open door the moonshine fell into the room
in a cold radiance to rival our meager lamplight. We all
waited — I with a dread expectancy — for no human being was
there. The wind alone came in, struggling with the weak
flame in the coal-oil lamp. Pushing and bunting about the
family warmth of our pot-bellied stove. Uncle Willie thought
it must have been the storm and told Bailey to close the door.
But just before he secured the raw wooden slab a voice drifted
through the crack; it wheezed, “Sister Henderson? Brother
Willie?”

Bailey nearly closed the door again, but Uncle Willie
asked, “Who is it?” and Mr. George Taylor’s pinched brown
face swam out of the gray and into view. He assured himself
that we hadn’t gone to bed, and was welcomed in. When
Momma saw him she invited him to stay for supper and told
me to stick some sweet potatoes in the ashes to stretch the eve-
ning meal. Poor Brother Taylor had been taking meals all
over town, ever since he buried his wife in the summer.
Maybe due to the fact that I was in my romanticist period, or



because children have a built-in survival apparatus, I feared he
was interested in marrying Momma and moving in with us.

Uncle Willie cradled the Almanac in his divided lap. “You
welcome here anytime, Brother Taylor, anytime, but this is a
bad night. It say right here” — with his crippled hand he
rapped the Almanac — that November twelfth, a storm going
to be moving over Stamps out of the east. A rough night.” Mr.
Taylor remained exactly in the same position he had taken
when he arrived, like a person too cold to readjust his body
even to get closer to the fire. His neck was bent and the red
light played over the polished skin of his hairless head. But his
eyes bound me with a unique attraction. They sat deep in his
little face and completely dominated the other features with a
roundness which seemed to be outlined in dark pencil, giving
him an owlish appearance. And when he sensed my regarding
him so steadily his head hardly moved but his eyes swirled
and landed on me. If his look had contained contempt or
patronage, or any of the vulgar emotions revealed by adults in
confrontation with children, I would have easily gone back to
my book, but his eyes gave off a watery nothing — a nothing-
ness which was completely unbearable. I saw a glassiness,
observed before only in new marbles or a bottle top embedded
in a block of ice. His glance moved so swiftly from me it was
nearly possible to imagine that I had in fact imagined the
interchange.

But, as I say, you welcome. We can always make a place
under this roof.” Uncle Willie didn’t seem to notice that Mr.
Taylor was oblivious to everything he said. Momma brought
the soup into the room, took the kettle off the heater and
placed the steaming pot on the fire. Uncle Willie continued,
Momma, I told Brother Taylor he is welcome here anytime.”
Momma said, That s right, Brother Taylor. You not




156



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



157



supposed to sit around that lonely house feeling sorry for
yourself. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away.”

I’m not sure whether it was Momma’s presence or the bub-
bling soup on the stove which influenced him, but Mr. Taylor
appeared to have livened up considerably. He shook his shoul-
ders as if shaking off a tiresome touch, and attempted a smile
that failed. “Sister Henderson, I sure appreciate ... I mean, I
don’t know what I’d do if it wasn’t for everybody ... I mean,
you don’t know what it’s worth to me to be able to . . . Well, I
mean I’m thankful.” At each pause, he pecked his head over
his chest like a turtle coming out of its shell, but his eyes didn’t
move.

Momma, always self-conscious at public displays of emo-
tions not traceable to a religious source, told me to come with
her and we’d bring the bread and bowls. She carried the food
and I trailed after her, bringing the kerosene lamp. The new
light set the room in an eerie, harsh perspective. Bailey still sat,
doubled over his book, a Black hunchbacked gnome. A finger
forerunning his eyes along the page. Uncle Willie and Mr.
Taylor were frozen like people in a book on the history of the
American Negro.

“Now, come on, Brother Taylor.” Momma was pressing a
bowl of soup on him. “You may not be hungry, but take this
for nourishment.” Her voice had the tender concern of a
healthy person speaking to an invalid, and her plain statement
rang thrillingly true: “I’m thankful.” Bailey came out of his
absorption and went to wash his hands.

“Willie, say the blessing.” Momma set Bailey’s bowl down
and bowed her head. During grace, Bailey stood in the
doorway, a figure of obedience, but I knew his mind was on
Tom Sawyer and Jim as mine would have been on Jane Eyre



and Mr. Rochester, but for the glittering eyes of wizened old
Mr. Taylor.

Our guest dutifully took a few spoonfuls of soup and bit a
semicircle in the bread, then put his bowl on the floor. Some-
thing in the fire held his attention as we ate noisily.

Noticing his withdrawal, Momma said, “It don’t do for
you to take on so, I know you all was together a long time — ”

Uncle Willie said, “Forty years.”

“ — but it’s been around six months since she’s gone to her
rest . . . and you got to keep faith. He never gives us more than
we can bear.” The statement heartened Mr. Taylor. He
picked up his bowl again and raked his spoon through the
thick soup.

Momma saw that she had made some contact, so she went
on, “You had a whole lot of good years. Got to be grateful for
them. Only thing is, it’s a pity you all didn’t have some
children.”

If my head had been down I would have missed Mr.
Taylor’s metamorphosis. It was not a change that came by
steps but rather, it seemed to me, of a sudden. His bowl was
on the floor with a thud, and his body leaned toward Momma
from the hips. However, his face was the most striking feature
of all. The brown expanse seemed to darken with life, as if an
.inner agitation played under his thin skin. The mouth,
opened to show the long teeth, was a dark room furnished
with a few white chairs.

“Children.” He gum-balled the word around in his empty
mouth. “Yes, sir, children.” Bailey (and I), used to be addressed
so, looked at him expectantly.

“That’s what she want.” His eyes were vital, and straining
to jump from the imprisoning sockets. “That’s what she said.
Children.”



t



158



159



MAYA ANGELOU

The air was weighted and thick. A bigger house had been
set on our roof and was imperceptibly pushing us into the
ground.

Momma asked, in her nice-folks voice, “What who said,
Brother Taylor?” She knew the answer. We all knew the
answer.

“Florida.” His little wrinkled hands were making fists,
then straightening, then making fists again. “She said it just
last night.”

Bailey and I looked at each other and I hunched my chair
closer to him. “Said ‘I want some children.’ ” When he pitched
his already high voice to what he considered a feminine level,
or at any rate to his wife’s, Miz Florida’s, level, it streaked
across the room, zigzagging like lightning.

Uncle Willie had stopped eating and was regarding him
with something like pity. “Maybe you was dreaming, Brother
Taylor. Could have been a dream.”

Momma came in placatingly. “That’s right. You know,
the children was reading me something th’other day. Say folks
dream about whatever was on their mind when they went to
sleep.”

Mr. Taylor jerked himself up. “It wasn’t not no dream. I
was as wide awake as I am this very minute.” He was angry
and the tension increased his little mask of strength.

“I’ll tell you what happened.”

Oh, Lord, a ghost story. I hated and dreaded the long
winter nights when late customers came to the Store to sit
around the heater roasting peanuts and trying to best each
other in telling lurid tales of ghosts and hants, banshees and
juju, voodoo and other anti-life stories. But a real one, that
happened to a real person, and last night. It was going to be
intolerable. I got up and walked to the window.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS
# * #

Mrs. Florida Taylor’s funeral in June came on the heels of
our final exams. Bailey and Louise and I had done very well
and were pleased with ourselves and each other. The summer
stretched golden in front of us with promises of picnics and
fish frys, blackberry hunts and croquet games till dark. It
would have taken a personal loss to penetrate my sense of
well-being. I had met and loved the Bronte sisters, and had
replaced Kipling’s “If’ with “Invictus.” My friendship with
Louise was solidified over jacks, hopscotch and confessions,
deep and dark, exchanged often after many a “Cross your
heart you won’t tell?” I never talked about St. Louis to her,
and had generally come to believe that the nightmare with its
attendant guilt and fear hadn’t really happened to me. It hap-
pened to a nasty little girl, years and years before, who had no
chain on me at all.

At first the news that Mrs. Taylor was dead did not strike
me as a particularly newsy bit of information. As children do,
I thought that since she was very old she had only one thing to
do, and that was to die. She was a pleasant enough woman,
with her steps made mincing by age and her little hands like
gentle claws that liked to touch young skin. Each time she
came to the Store, I was forced to go up to her, while she
raked her yellow nails down my cheeks. “You sure got a
pretty complexion.” It was a rare compliment in a world of
very few such words of praise, so it balanced being touched by
the dry fingers.

“You going to the funeral, Sister.” Momma wasn’t asking
a question.

Momma said, “You going ’cause Sister Taylor thought so
much of you she left you her yellow brooch.” (She wouldn’t




160



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



161



say gold, because it wasn’t.) “She told Brother Taylor, ‘I
want Sis Henderson’s grandbaby to have my gold brooch.’ So
you’ll have to go.”

I had followed a few coffins up the hill from the church to
the cemetery, but because Momma said I was tender-hearted I
had never been forced to sit through a funeral service. At eleven
years old, death is more unreal than frightening. It seemed a
waste of a good afternoon to sit in church for a silly old brooch,
which was not only not gold but was too old for me to wear. But
if Momma said I had to go it was certain that I would be there.

The mourners on the front benches sat in a blue-serge,
black-crepe-dress gloom. A funeral hymn made its way
around the church tediously but successfully. It eased into the
heart of every gay thought, into the care of each happy
memory. Shattering the light and hopeful: “On the other side
of Jordan, there is a peace for the weary, there is a peace for
me - The inevitable destination of all living things seemed but
a short step away. I had never considered before that dying,
death, dead, passed away, were words and phrases that might
be even faintly connected with me.

But on that onerous day, oppressed beyond relief, my own
mortality was borne in upon me on sluggish tides of doom.

No sooner had the mournful song run its course than the
minister took to the altar and delivered a sermon that in my
state gave little comfort. Its subject was, “Thou art my good
and faithful servant with whom I am well pleased.” His voice
enweaved itself through the somber vapors left by the dirge.
In a monotonous tone he warned the listeners that “this day
might be your last,” and the best insurance against dying a
sinner was to “make yourself right with God” so that on the
fateful day He would say, “Thou art my good and faithful ser-
vant with whom I am well pleased.”



After he had put the fear of the cold grave under our
skins, he began to speak of Mrs. Taylor, “A godly woman,
who gave to the poor, visited the sick, tithed to the church and
in general lived a life of goodliness.” At this point he began to
talk directly to the coffin, which I had noticed upon my arrival
and had studiously avoided thereafter.

I hungered and you gave me to eat. I was thirsty and you
gave me to drink. I was sick and you visited me. In prison, and
you left me not. Inasmuch as you have done it unto the least of
one of these, you have done it unto Me.” He bounded off the
dais and approached the velvet gray box. With an imperious
gesture, he snatched the gray cloth off the open flap and gazed
downward into the mystery.

Sleep on, thy graceful soul, till Christ calls you to come
forth into His bright heaven.”

He continued speaking directly to the dead woman, and I
half wished she would rise up and answer him, offended by
the coarseness of his approach. A scream burst from Mr.
Taylor. He stood up suddenly and lengthened his arms
toward the minister, the coffin and his wife’s corpse. For a
long minute he hovered, his back to the church as the instruc-
tive words kept falling around the room, rich with promise,
.full with warnings. Momma and other ladies caught him in
time to bring him back to the bench, where he quickly folded
upon himself like a Br’er Rabbit rag doll.

Mr. Taylor and the high church officials were the first to
file around the bier to wave farewell to the departed and get a
glimpse of what lay in store for all men. Then on heavy feet,
made more ponderous by the guilt of the living viewing the
dead, the adult church marched up to the coffin and back to
their seats. Their faces, which showed apprehension before




162



MAYA ANGELOU



! KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



163



reaching the coffin, revealed, on the way down the opposite
aisle, a final confirmation of their fears. Watching them was a
little like peeping through a window when the shade is not
drawn flush. Although I didn’t try, it was impossible not to
record their roles in the drama.

And then a black-dressed usher stuck her hand out wood-
enly toward the children’s rows. There was the shifty rustling
of unreadiness but finally a boy of fourteen led us off and I
dared not hang back, as much as I hated the idea of seeing
Mrs. Taylor. Up the aisle, the moans and screams merged
with the sickening smell of woolen black clothes worn in
summer weather and green leaves wilting over yellow
flowers. I couldn’t distinguish whether I was smelling the
clutching sound of misery or hearing the cloying odor of
death.

It would have been easier to see her through the gauze,
but instead I looked down on the stark face that seemed sud-
denly so empty and evil. It knew secrets that I never wanted to
share. The cheeks had fallen back to the ears and a solicitous
mortician had put lipstick on the black mouth. The scent of
decay was sweet and clasping. It groped for life with a hunger
both greedy and hateful. But it was hypnotic. I wanted to be
off but my shoes had glued themselves to the floor and I had to
hold on to the sides of the coffin to remain standing. The
unexpected halt in the moving line caused the children to
press upon each other, and whispers of no small intent
reached my ears.

“Move along, Sister, move along.” It was Momma. Her
voice tugged at my will and someone pushed from the rear, so
I was freed.

Instantly I surrendered myself to the grimness of death.
The change it had been able to effect in Mrs. Taylor showed



that its strength could not be resisted. Her high-pitched voice,
which parted the air in the Store, was forever stilled, and the
plump brown face had been deflated and patted flat like a
cow’s ordurous dropping.

The coffin was carried on a horse-drawn wagon to the
cemetery, and all the way I communed with death’s angels,
questioning their choice of time, place and person.

For the first time the burial ceremony had meaning
for me.

“Ashes to ashes and dust to dust.” It was certain that Mrs.
Taylor was returning to the earth from whence she came. In
face, upon considering, I concluded that she had looked like a
mud baby, lying on the white satin of her velvet coffin. A mud
baby, molded into form by creative children on a rainy day,
soon to run back into the loose earth.

The memory of the grim ceremony had been so real to me
that I was surprised to look up and see Momma and Uncle
Willie eating by the stove. They were neither anxious nor
hesitant, as if they knew a man has to say what he has to say.
But I didn’t want to hear any of it, and the wind, allying itself
with me, threatened the chinaberry tree outside the back door.

“Last night, after I said my prayers, I lay down on the bed.
Well, you know it’s the same bed she died on.” Oh, if he’d
shut up. Momma said, “Sister, sit down and eat your soup.
Cold night like this you need something hot in your stomach.
Go on, Brother Taylor. Please.” I sat down as near Bailey as
possible.

“Well, something told me to open my eyes.”

What kind of something?” Momma asked, not laying
down her spoon.




164



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



165



“Yes, sir,” Uncle Willie explained, “there can be a good
something and there can be a bad something.”

“Well, I wasn’t sure, so I figured better open ’em, ’cause it
could have been, well, either one. I did, and the first thing, I
saw little baby angel. It was just as fat as a butterball, and
laughing, eyes blue, blue, blue.”

Uncle Willie asked, “A baby angel?”

“Yes, sir, and it was laughing right in my face. Then I
heard this long moan, ‘Agh-h-h-.’ Well, as you say, Sister
Henderson, we been together over forty years. I know
Florida’s voice. I wasn’t scared right then. I called ‘Florida?’
Then that angel laughed harder and the moan got louder.”

I set my bowl down and got closer to Bailey. Mrs. Taylor
had been a very pleasant woman, smiling all the time and
patient. The only thing that jarred and bothered me when she
came in the Store was her voice. Like near-deaf people, she
screamed, half not hearing what she was saying and partly
hoping her listeners would reply in kind. That was when she
was living. The thought of that voice coming out of the grave
and all the way down the hill from the cemetery and hanging
over my head was enough to straighten my hair.

“Yes, sir.” He was looking at the stove and the red glow fell
on his face. It seemed as if he had a fire going inside his head.
“First I called, ‘Florida, Florida. What do you want?’ And that
devilish angel kept on laughing to beat the band.” Mr. Taylor
tried to laugh and only succeeded in looking frightened. “ ‘I
want some . . .’ That’s when she said ‘I want some.’ ” He made
his voice sound like the wind, if the wind had bronchial pneu-
monia. He wheezed, “ ‘I want some chi-il-dren.’ ”

Bailey and I met halfway on the drafty floor.

Momma said, “Now, Brother Taylor, could be you was



dreaming. You know, they say whatever you goes to bed with
on your mind . . .”

“No, ma’am, Sister Henderson, I was as wide awake as I
am right now.”

“Did she let you see her?” Uncle Willie had a dreamy look
on his face.

“No, Willie, all I seed was that fat little white baby
angel. But wasn’t no mistaking that voice ... ‘I want some
children.’ ”

The cold wind had frozen my feet and my spine, and Mr.
Taylor’s impersonation had chilled my blood.

Momma said, “Sister, go bring the long fork to take the
potatoes out.”

“Ma’am?” Surely she didn’t mean the long fork that
hung on the wall behind the kitchen stove — a scary million
miles away.

“I said, go get the fork. The potatoes are burning.”

I unwound my legs from the gripping fear and almost
tripped onto the stove. Momma said, “That child would
stumble over the pattern in a rug. Go on, Brother Taylor, did
she say any more?”

I didn’t want to hear it if she did, but I wasn’t eager to
leave the lighted room where my family sat around the
friendly fire.

“Well, she said ‘Aaah’ a few more times and then that
angel started to walk off the ceiling. I tell you I was purt’ near
scared stiff.”

I had reached the no man’s ocean of darkness. No great
decision was called for. I knew it would be torturous to go
through the thick blackness of Uncle Willie’s bedroom, but it
would be easier than staying around to hear the ghoulish
story. Also, I couldn’t afford to aggravate Momma. When she




166



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



167



was displeased she made me sleep on the edge of the bed and
that night I knew I needed to be close to her.

One foot into the darkness and the sense of detachment
from reality nearly made me panic. The idea came to me that I
might never get out into the light again. Quickly I found the
door leading back to the familiar, but as I opened it the awful
story reached out and tried to grab my ears. I closed the door.

Naturally, I believed in hants and ghosts and “thangs.”
Having been raised by a super-religious Southern Negro
grandmother, it would have been abnormal had I not been
superstitious.

The trip to the kitchen and back could not have taken
more than two minutes, yet in that time I tramped through
swampy cemeteries, climbed over dusty gravestones and
eluded litters of night-black cats.

Back in the family circle, I remarked to myself how like a
cyclopean eye was the belly of the red-hot stove.

“It reminded me of the time when my daddy died. You
know we’re very close.” Mr. Taylor had hypnotized himself
into the eerie world of horrors.

I broke into his reminiscences. “Momma, here’s the fork.”
Bailey had lain down on his side behind the stove and his eyes
were shining. He was more fascinated with Mr. Taylor’s
morbid interest in his story than with the tale itself.

Momma put her hand on my arm and said, “You shaking,
Sister. What’s the matter?” My skin still rippled from the
experience of fear.

Uncle Willie laughed and said, “Maybe she was scared to
go in the kitchen.”

His high little laugh didn’t fool me. Everyone was uneasy
at being beckoned into the unknown.



“No sir, I ain’t never seen nothing so clear as that little
angel baby.” His jaws were scissoring mechanically on the
already mushy sweet potatoes. “Just laughing, like a house on
fire. What you reckon it mean, Sister Henderson?”

Momma had reared back in her rocking chair, a half
smile on her face, “If you sure you wasn’t dreaming, Brother
Taylor . . .”

“I was as wide awake as I am” — he was becoming angry
again — “as I am right now.”

“Well, then, maybe it means — ”

“I ought to know when I’m asleep and when I’m awake.”
“ — maybe it mean Sister Florida wants you to work with
the children in the church.”

“One thing I always used to tell Florida, people won’t let
you get your words in edgewise — ”

“Could be she’s trying to tell you — ”

“I ain’t crazy, you know. My mind’s just as good as it
was.”

“ — to take a Sunday school class — ”

“Thirty years ago. If I say I was awake when I saw that
little fat angel, then people ought to — ”

“Sunday school need more teachers. Lord knows that’s so.”
“ — believe me when I say so.”

Their remarks and responses were like a Ping-Pong game
with each volley clearing the net and flying back to the opposi-
tion. The sense of what they were saying became lost, and only
the exercise remained. The exchange was conducted with the
certainty of a measured hoedown and had the jerkiness of
Monday’s wash snapping in the wind — now cracking east,
then west, with only the intent to whip the dampness out of
the cloth.

Within a few minutes the intoxication of doom had fled,




168



MAYA ANGELOU



as if it had never been, and Momma was encouraging Mr.
Taylor to take in one of the Jenkins boys to help him with his
farm. Uncle Willie was nodding at the fire, and Bailey had
escaped back to the calm adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
The change in the room was remarkable. Shadows which had
lengthened and darkened over the bed in the corner had dis-
appeared or revealed themselves as dark images of familiar
chairs and such. The light which dashed on the ceiling
steadied, and imitated rabbits rather than lions, and donkeys
instead of ghouls.

I laid a pallet for Mr. Taylor in Uncle Willie’s room and
crawled under Momma, who I knew for the first time was so
good and righteous she could command the fretful spirits, as
Jesus had commanded the sea. “Peace, be still.”



CHAPTER 23






The children in Stamps trembled visibly with anticipation.
Some adults were excited too, but to be certain the whole
young population had come down with graduation epidemic.
Large classes were graduating from both the grammar school
and the high school. Even those who were years removed
from their own day of glorious release were anxious to help
with preparations as a kind of dry run. The junior students who
were moving into the vacating classes’ chairs were tradition-
bound to show their talents for leadership and management.
They strutted through the school and around the campus
exerting pressure on the lower grades. Their authority was so
new that occasionally if they pressed a little too hard it had to
be overlooked. After all, next term was coming, and it never
hurt a sixth grader to have a play sister in the eighth grade, or
a tenth-year student to be able to call a twelfth grader Bubba.
So all was endured in a spirit of shared understanding. But the
graduating classes themselves were the nobility. Like travelers
with exotic destinations on their minds, the graduates were
remarkably forgetful. They came to school without their




170



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



171



books, or tablets or even pencils. Volunteers fell over them-
selves to secure replacements for the missing equipment.
When accepted, the willing workers might or might not be
thanked, and it was of no importance to the pregraduation
rites. Even teachers were respectful of the now quiet and
aging seniors, and tended to speak to them, if not as equals, as
beings only slightly lower than themselves. After tests were
returned and grades given, the student body, which acted like
an extended family, knew who did well, who excelled, and
what piteous ones had failed.

Unlike the white high school, Lafayette County Training
School distinguished itself by having neither lawn, nor hedges,
nor tennis court, nor climbing ivy. Its two buildings (main
classrooms, the grade school and home economics) were set on
a dirt hill with no fence to limit either its boundaries or those of
bordering farms. There was a large expanse to the left of the
school which was used alternately as a baseball diamond or a
basketball court. Rusty hoops on the swaying poles represented
the permanent recreational equipment, although bats and balls
could be borrowed from the P. E. teacher if the borrower was
qualified and if the diamond wasn’t occupied.

Over this rocky area relieved by a few shady tall per-
simmon trees the graduating class walked. The girls often
held hands and no longer bothered to speak to the lower stu-
dents. There was a sadness about them, as if this old world
was not their home and they were bound for higher ground.
The boys, on the other hand, had become more friendly, more
outgoing. A decided change from the closed attitude they pro-
jected while studying for finals. Now they seemed not ready to
give up the old school, the familiar paths and classrooms. Only
a small percentage would be continuing on to college — one of
the South’s A & M (agricultrual and mechanical) schools,



which trained Negro youths to be carpenters, farmers,
handymen, masons, maids, cooks and baby nurses. Their
future rode heavily on their shoulders, and blinded them to
the collective joy that had pervaded the lives of the boys and
girls in the grammar school graduating class.

Parents who could afford it had ordered new shoes and
ready-made clothes for themselves from Sears and Roebuck or
Montgomery Ward. They also engaged the best seamstresses to
make the floating graduating dresses and to cut down second-
hand pants which would be pressed to a military slickness for
the important event.

Oh, it was important, all right. Whitefolks would attend
the ceremony, and two or three would speak of God and
home, and the Southern way of life, and Mrs. Parsons, the
principal’s, wife, would play the graduation march while the
lower-grade graduates paraded down the aisles and took their
seats below the platform. The high school seniors would wait
in empty classrooms to make their dramatic entrance.

In the Store I was the person of the moment. The birthday
girl. The center. Bailey had graduated the year before,
although to do so he had had to forfeit all pleasures to make
up for his time lost in Baton Rouge.

My class was wearing butter-yellow pique dresses, and
Momma launched out on mine. She smocked the yoke into
tiny crisscrossing puckers, then shirred the rest of the bodice.
Eler dark fingers ducked in and out of the lemony cloth as she
embroidered raised daisies around the hem. Before she con-
sidered herself finished she had added a crocheted cuff on the
puff sleeves, and a pointy crocheted collar.

I was going to be lovely. A walking model of all the
various styles of fine hand sewing and it didn’t worry me that



i



172



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



173



I was only twelve years old and merely graduating from the
eighth grade. Besides, many teachers in Arkansas Negro
schools had only that diploma and were licensed to impart
wisdom.

The days had become longer and more noticeable. The
faded beige of former times had been replaced with strong
and sure colors. I began to see my classmates’ clothes, their
skin tones, and the dust that waved off pussy willows. Clouds
that lazed across the sky were objects of great concern to me.
Their shiftier shapes might have held a message that in my
new happiness and with a little bit of time I’d soon decipher.
During that period I looked at the arch of heaven so reli-
giously my neck kept a steady ache. I had taken to smiling
more often, and my jaws hurt from the unaccustomed
activity. Between the two physical sore spots, I suppose I could
have been uncomfortable, but that was not the case. As a
member of the winning team (the graduating class of 1940 ) I
had outdistanced unpleasant sensations by miles. I was headed
for the freedom of open fields.

Youth and social approval allied themselves with me and
we trammeled memories of slights and insults. The wind of our
swift passage remodeled my features. Lost tears were pounded
to mud and then to dust. Years of withdrawal were brushed
aside and left behind, as hanging ropes of parasitic moss.

My work alone had awarded me a top place and I was
going to be one of the first called in the graduating ceremonies.
On the classroom blackboard, as well as on the bulletin board
in the auditorium, there were blue stars and white stars and red
stars. No absences, no tardinesses, and my academic work was
among the best of the year. I could say the preamble to the Con-
stitution even faster than Bailey. We timed ourselves often:
WethepeopleoftheUnitedStatesinordertoformamoreperfect-



union ...” I had memorized the Presidents of the United States
from Washington to Roosevelt in chronological as well as
alphabetical order.

My hair pleased me too. Gradually the black mass had
lengthened and thickened, so that it kept at last to its braided
pattern, and I didn’t have to yank my scalp off when I tried to
comb it.

Louise and I had rehearsed the exercises until we tired out
ourselves. Henry Reed was class valedictorian. He was a
small, very black boy with hooded eyes, and long, broad nose
and an oddly shaped head. I had admired him for years
because each term he and I vied for the best grades in our
class. Most often he bested me, but instead of being disap-
pointed I was pleased that we shared top places between us.
Like many Southern Black children, he lived with his grand-
mother, who was as strict as Momma and as kind as she knew
how to be. He was courteous, respectful and soft-spoken to
elders, but on the playground he chose to play the roughest
games. I admired him. Anyone, I reckoned, sufficiently afraid
or sufficiently dull could be polite. But to be able to operate at
a top level with both adults and children was admirable.

His valedictory speech was entitled “To Be or Not to Be.”
The rigid tenth-grade teacher had helped him write it. He’d
been working on the dramatic stresses for months.

The weeks until graduation were filled with heady activi-
ties. A group of small children were to be presented in a play
about buttercups and daisies and bunny rabbits. They could
be heard throughout the building practicing their hops and
their little songs that sounded like silver bells. The older girls
(nongraduates, of course) were assigned the task of making
refreshments for the night’s festivities. A tangy scent of
ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg and chocolate wafted around the



174



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



175






home economics building as the budding cooks made samples
for themselves and their teachers.

In every corner of the workshop, axes and saws split fresh
timber as the woodshop boys made sets and stage scenery.
Only the graduates were left out of the general bustle. We
were free to sit in the library at the back of the building or
look in quite detachedly, naturally, on the measures being
taken for our event.

Even the minister preached on graduation the Sunday
before. His subject was, “Let your light so shine that men will
see your good works and praise your Father, Who is in
Heaven. ’’Although the sermon was purported to be addressed
to us, he used the occasion to speak to backsliders, gamblers
and general ne’er-do-wells. But since he had called our names
at the beginning of the service we were mollified.

Among Negroes the tradition was to give presents to chil-
dren going only from one grade to another. How much more
important this was when the person was graduating at the top
of the class. Uncle Willie and Momma had sent away for a
Mickey Mouse watch like Bailey’s. Louise gave me four
embroidered handkerchiefs. (I gave her three crocheted
doilies.) Mrs. Sneed, the minister’s wife, made me an under-
skirt to wear for graduation, and nearly every customer gave
me a nickel or maybe even a dime with the instruction “Keep
on moving to higher ground,” or some such encouragement.

Amazingly the great day finally dawned and I was out of
bed before I knew it. I threw open the back door to see it more
clearly, but Momma said, “Sister, come away from that door
and put your robe on.”

I hoped the memory of that morning would never leave
me. Sunlight was itself still young, and the day had none of
the insistence maturity would bring it in a few hours. In my



robe and barefoot in the backyard, under cover of going to see
about my new beans, I gave myself up to the gentle warmth
and thanked God that no matter what evil I had done in my
life He had allowed me to live to see this day. Somewhere in
my fatalism I had expected to die, accidentally, and never have
the chance to walk up the stairs in the auditorium and grace-
fully receive my hard-earned diploma. Out of God’s merciful
bosom I had won reprieve.

Bailey came out in his robe and gave me a box wrapped in
Christmas paper. He said he had saved his money for months
to pay for it. It felt like a box of chocolates, but I knew Bailey
wouldn’t save money to buy candy when we had all we could
want under our noses.

He was as proud of the gift as I. It was a soft -leather-
bound copy of a collection of poems by Edgar Allan Poe, or, as
Bailey and I called him, “Eap.” I turned to “Annabel Lee” and
we walked up and down the garden rows, the cool dirt
between our toes, reciting the beautifully sad lines.

Momma made a Sunday breakfast although it was only
Friday. After we finished the blessing, I opened my eyes to
find the watch on my plate. It was a dream of a day. Every-
thing went smoothly and to my credit. I didn’t have to be
reminded or scolded for anything. Near evening I was too jit-
tery to attend to chores, so Bailey volunteered to do all before
his bath.

Days before, we had made a sign for the Store, and as we
turned out the lights Momma hung the cardboard over the
doorknob. It read clearly: closed, graduation.

My dress fitted perfectly and everyone said that I looked
like a sunbeam in it. On the hill, going toward the school,
Bailey walked behind with Uncle Willie, who muttered, “Go
on, Ju. He wanted him to walk ahead with us because it




176



MAYA ANG ELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



177



embarrassed him to have to walk so slowly. Bailey said he’d let
the ladies walk together, and the men would bring up the
rear. We all laughed, nicely.

Little children dashed by out of the dark like fireflies.
Their crepe-paper dresses and butterfly wings were not made
for running and we heard more than one rip, dryly, and the
regretful “uh uh” that followed.

The school blazed without gaiety. The windows seemed
cold and unfriendly from the lower hill. A sense of ill-fated
timing crept over me, and if Momma hadn’t reached for my
hand I would have drifted back to Bailey and Uncle Willie,
and possibly beyond. She made a few slow jokes about my feet
getting cold, and tugged me along to the now-strange
building.

Around the front steps, assurance came back. There were
my fellow greats,” the graduating class. Hair brushed back,
legs oiled, new dresses and pressed pleats, fresh pocket hand-
kerchiefs and little handbags, all homesewn. Oh, we were up
to snuff, all right. I joined my comrades and didn’t even see
my family go in to find seats in the crowded auditorium.

The school band struck up a march and all classes filed in
as had been rehearsed. We stood in front of our seats, as
assigned, and on a signal from the choir director, we sat. No
sooner had this been accomplished than the band started to
play the national anthem. We rose again and sang the song,
after which we recited the pledge of allegiance. We remained
standing for a brief minute before the choir director and the
principal signaled to us, rather desperately I thought, to take
our seats. The command was so unusual that our carefully
rehearsed and smooth-running machine was thrown off. For
a full minute we fumbled for our chairs and bumped into each
other awkwardly. Habits change or solidify under pressure, so



in our state of nervous tension we had been ready to follow
our usual assembly pattern: the American national anthem,
then the pledge of allegiance, then the song every Black
person I knew called the Negro National Anthem. All done in
the same key, with the same passion and most often standing
on the same foot.

Finding my seat at least, I was overcome with a presenti-
ment of worse things to come. Something unrehearsed,
unplanned, was going to happen, and we were going to be
made to look bad. I distinctly remember being explicit in the
choice of pronoun. It was “we,” the graduating class, the unit,
that concerned me then.

The principal welcomed “parents and friends” and asked
the Baptist minister to lead us in prayer. His invocation was
brief and punchy, and for a second I thought we were getting
back on the high road to right action. When the principal
came back to the dais, however, his voice had changed.
Sounds always affected me profoundly and the principal’s
voice was one of my favorites. During assembly it melted and
lowed weakly into the audience. It had not been in my plan to
listen to him, but my curiosity was piqued and I straightened
up to give him my attention.

He was talking about Booker T. Washington, our “late
great leader,” who said we can be as close as the fingers on the
hand, etc. . . . Then he said a few vague things about friend-
ship and the friendship of kindly people to those less fortunate
than themselves. With that his voice nearly faded, thin, away.
Like a river diminishing to a stream and then to a trickle. But
he cleared his throat and said, “Our speaker tonight, who is
also our friend, came from Texarkana to deliver the com-
mencement address, but due to the irregularity of the train
schedule, he’s going to, as they say, ‘speak and run.’ ” He said




178



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



179



that we understood and wanted the man to know that we
were most grateful for the time he was able to give us and then
something about how we were willing always to adjust to
another’s program, and without more ado — “I give you Mr.
Edward Donleavy.”

Not one but two white men came through the door off-
stage. The shorter one walked to the speaker’s platform, and
the tall one moved over to the center seat and sat down. But
that was our principal’s seat, and already occupied. The dis-
lodged gentleman bounced around for a long breath or two
before the Baptist minister gave him his chair, then with more
dignity than the situation deserved, the minister walked off
the stage.

Donleavy looked at the audience once (on reflection, I’m
sure that he wanted only to reassure himself that we were
really there), adjusted his glasses and began to read from a
sheaf of papers.

He was glad to be here and to see the work going on just
as it was in the other schools.”

At the first “Amen” from the audience I willed the
offender to immediate death by choking on the word. But
Amens and Yes, sir s began to fall around the room like rain
through a ragged umbrella.

He told us of the wonderful changes we children in
Stamps had in store. The Central School (naturally, the white
school was Central) had already been granted improvements
that would be in use in the fall. A well-known artist was
coming from Little Rock to teach art to them. They were
going to have the newest microscopes and chemistry equip-
ment for their laboratory. Mr. Donleavy didn’t leave us long
in the dark over who made these improvements available to



Central High. Nor were we to be ignored in the general bet-
terment scheme he had in mind.

He said that he had pointed out to people at a very high
level that one of the first-line football tacklers at Arkansas
Agricultural and Mechanical College had graduated from
good old Lafayette County Training School. Here fewer
Amen’s were heard. Those few that did break through lay
dully in the air with the heaviness of habit.

He went on to praise us. He went on to say how he had
bragged that “one of the best basketball players at Fisk sank
his first ball right here at Lafayette County Training School.”

The white kids were going to have a chance to become
Galileos and Madame Curies and Edisons and Gauguins, and
our boys (the girls weren’t even in on it) would try to be Jesse
Owenses and Joe Louises.

Owens and the Brown Bomber were great heroes in our
world, but what school official in the white-goddom of Little
Rock had the right to decide that those two men must be our
only heroes? Who decided that for Henry Reed to become a
scientist he had to work like George Washington Carver, as a
bootblack, to buy a lousy microscope? Bailey was obviously
always going to be too small to be an athlete, so which con-
crete angel glued to what country seat had decided that if my
brother wanted to become a lawyer he had to first pay penance
for his skin by picking cotton and hoeing corn and studying
correspondence books at night for twenty years?

The man’s dead words fell like bricks around the audito-
rium and too many settled in my belly. Constrained by hard-
learned manners I couldn’t look behind me, but to my left and
right the proud graduating class of 1940 had dropped their
heads. Every girl in my row had found something new to do
with her handkerchief. Some folded the tiny squares into love




180



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



181



knots, some into triangles, but most were wadding them, then
pressing them flat on their yellow laps.

On the dais, the ancient tragedy was being replayed. Pro-
fessor Parsons sat, a sculptor’s reject, rigid. His large, heavy
body seemed devoid of will or willingness, and his eyes said he
was no longer with us. The other teachers examined the flag
(which was draped stage right) or their notes, or the windows
which opened on our now-famous playing diamond.

Graduation, the hush-hush magic time of frills and gifts
and congratulations and diplomas, was finished for me before
my name was called. The accomplishment was nothing. The
meticulous maps, drawn in three colors of ink, learning and
spelling decasyllabic words, memorizing the whole of The Rape
of Lucrece — it was for nothing. Donleavy had exposed us.

We were maids and farmers, handymen and washer-
women, and anything higher that we aspired to was farcical
and presumptuous.

Then I wished that Gabriel Prosser and Nat Turner had
killed all whitefolks in their beds and that Abraham Lincoln
had been assassinated before the signing of the Emancipation
Proclamation, and that Harriet Tubman had been killed by
that blow on her head and Christopher Columbus had
drowned in the Santa Maria.

It was awful to be Negro and have no control over my life.
It was brutal to be young and already trained to sit quietly and
listen to charges brought against my color with no chance of
defense. We should all be dead. I thought I should like to see
us all dead, one on top of the other. A pyramid of flesh with
the whitefolks on the bottom, as the broad base, then the
Indians with their silly tomahawks and teepees and wigwams
and treaties, the Negroes with their mops and recipes and
cotton sacks and spirituals sticking out of their mouths. The



Dutch children should all stumble in their wooden shoes and
break their necks. The French should choke to death on the
Louisiana Purchase (1803) while silkworms ate all the Chinese
with their stupid pigtails. As a species, we were an abomina-
tion. All of us.

Donleavy was running for election, and assured our par-
ents that if he won we could count on having the only colored
paved playing field in that part of Arkansas. Also — he never
looked up to acknowledge the grunts of acceptance — also, we
were bound to get some new equipment for the home eco-
nomics building and the workshop.

He finished, and since there was no need to give any more
than the most perfunctory thank-you’s, he nodded to the men
on the stage, and the tall white man who was never intro-
duced joined him at the door. They left with the attitude that
now they were off to something really important. (The
graduation ceremonies at Lafayette County Training School
had been a mere preliminary.)

The ugliness they left was palpable. An uninvited guest
who wouldn’t leave. The choir was summoned and sang a
modern arrangement of “Onward, Christian Soldiers,” with
new words pertaining to graduates seeking their place in the
world. But it didn’t work. Elouise, the daughter of the Baptist
minister, recited “Invictus,” and I could have cried at the
impertinence of “I am the master of my fate, I am the captain
of my soul.”

My name had lost its ring of familiarity and I had to be
nudged to go and receive my diploma. All my preparations
had fled. I neither marched up to the stage like a conquering
Amazon, nor did I look in the audience for Bailey’s nod of
approval. Marguerite Johnson, I heard the name again, my




182



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



183



honors were read, there were noises in the audience of appre-
ciation, and I took my place on the stage as rehearsed.

I thought about colors I hated: ecru, puce, lavender, beige
and black.

There was shuffling and rustling around me, then Henry
Reed was giving his valedictory address, “To Be or Not to
Be.” Hadn’t he heard the whitefolks? We couldn’t be, so the
question was a waste of time. Henry’s voice came out clear
and strong. I feared to look at him. Hadn’t he got the mes-
sage? There was no “nobler in the mind” for Negroes because
the world didn’t think we had minds, and they let us know it.
“Outrageous fortune”? Now, that was a joke. When the cere-
mony was over I had to tell Henry Reed some things. That is,
if I still cared. Not “rub,” Henry, “erase.” “Ah, there’s the
erase.” Us.

Henry had been a good student in elocution. His voice
rose on tides of promise and fell on waves of warnings. The
English teacher had helped him to create a sermon winging
through Hamlet’s soliloquy. To be a man, a doer, a builder, a
leader, or to be a tool, an unfunny joke, a crusher of funky
toadstools. I marveled that Henry could go through with the
speech as if we had a choice.

I had been listening and silently rebutting each sentence
with my eyes closed; then there was a hush, which in an audi-
ence warns that something unplanned is happening. I looked
up and saw Henry Reed, the conservative, the proper, the A
student, turn his back to the audience and turn to us (the
proud graduating class of 1940) and sing, nearly speaking,

“Lift ev’ry voice and sing
Till earth and heaven ring
Ring with the harmonies of Liberty . . .”



It was the poem written by James Weldon Johnson. It was the
music composed by J. Rosamond Johnson. It was the Negro
national anthem. Out of habit we were singing it.

Our mothers and fathers stood in the dark hall and joined
the hymn of encouragement. A kindergarten teacher led the
small children onto the stage and the buttercups and daisies
and bunny rabbits marked time and tried to follow:

“Stony the road we trod

Bitter the chastening rod

Felt in the days when hope, unborn, had died.

Yet with a steady beat

Have not our weary feet

Come to the place for which our fathers sighed?”

Every child I knew had learned that song with his ABC’s and
along with “Jesus Loves Me This I know.” But I personally
had never heard it before. Never heard the words, despite the
thousands of times I had sung them. Never thought they had
anything to do with me.

On the other hand, the words of Patrick Henry had made
such an impression on me that I had been able to stretch
myself tall and trembling and say, “I know not what course
others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me
death.”

And now I heard, really for the first time:

“We have come over a way that with tears
has been watered,

“Lift Ev’ry Voice and Sing” — words by James Weldon Johnson and music
by J. Rosamond Johnson. Copyright by Edward B. Marks Music Corpora-
tion. Used by permission.



i,




184



MAYA ANGELOU



We have come, treading our path through
the blood of the slaughtered.”

While echoes of the song shivered in the air, Henry Reed
bowed his head, said Thank you,” and returned to his place
in the line. The tears that slipped down many faces were not
wiped away in shame.

We were on top again. As always, again. We survived.
The depths had been icy and dark, but now a bright sun spoke
to our souls. I was no longer simply a member of the proud
graduating class of 1940; I was a proud member of the won-
derful, beautiful Negro race.

Oh, Black known and unknown poets, how often have
your auctioned pains sustained us? Who will compute the
lonely nights made less lonely by your songs, or by the empty
pots made less tragic by your tales?

If we were a people much given to revealing secrets, we
might raise monuments and sacrifice to the memories of our
poets, but slavery cured us of that weakness. It may be
enough, however, to have it said that we survive in exact rela-
tionship to the dedication of our poets (include preachers,
musicians and blues singers).



C H APTE R 24





The Angel of the candy counter had found me out at last,
and was exacting excruciating penance for all the stolen Milky
Ways, Mounds, Mr. Goodbars and Hersheys with Almonds. I
had two cavities that were rotten to the gums. The pain was
beyond the bailiwick of crushed aspirins or oil of cloves. Only
one thing could help me, so I prayed earnestly that I’d be
allowed to sit under the house and have the building collapse
on my left jaw. Since there was no Negro dentist in Stamps,
nor doctor either, for that matter, Momma had dealt with pre-
vious toothaches by pulling them out (a string tied to the tooth
with the other end lopped over her fist), pain killers and
prayer. In this particular instance the medicine had proved
ineffective; there wasn’t enough enamel left to hook a string
on, and the prayers were being ignored because the Balancing
Angel was blocking their passage.

I lived a few days and nights in blinding pain, not so much
toying with as seriously considering the idea of jumping in the
well, and Momma decided I had to be taken to a dentist. The
nearest Negro dentist was in Texarkana, twenty-five miles




186



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



187



away, and I was certain that I’d be dead long before we
reached half the distance. Momma said we’d go to Dr. Lin-
coln, right in Stamps, and he’d take care of me. She said he
owed her a favor.

I knew that there were a number of whitefolks in town
that owed her favors. Bailey and I had seen the books which
showed how she had lent money to Blacks and whites alike
during the Depression, and most still owed her. But I couldn’t
aptly remember seeing Dr. Lincoln’s name, nor had I ever
heard of a Negro s going to him as a patient. However,
Momma said we were going, and put water on the stove for
our baths. I had never been to a doctor, so she told me that
after the bath (which would make my mouth feel better) I had
to put on freshly starched and ironed underclothes from inside
out. The ache failed to respond to the bath, and I knew then
that the pain was more serious than that which anyone had
ever suffered.

Before we left the Store, she ordered me to brush my teeth
and then wash my mouth with Listerine. The idea of even
opening my clamped jaws increased the pain, but upon her
explanation that when you go to a doctor you have to clean
yourself all over, but most especially the part that’s to be
examined, I screwed up my courage and unlocked my teeth.
The cool air in my mouth and the jarring of my molars dis-
lodged what little remained of my reason. I had frozen to the
pain, my family nearly had to tie me down to take the tooth-
brush away. It was no small effort to get me started on the
road to the dentist. Momma spoke to all the passers-by, but
didn’t stop to chat. She explained over her shoulder that we
were going to the doctor and she’d “pass the time of day” on
our way home.

Until we reached the pond the pain was my world, an



aura that haloed me for three feet around. Crossing the bridge
into whitefolks’ country, pieces of sanity pushed themselves
forward. I had to stop moaning and start walking straight.
The white towel, which was drawn under my chin and tied
over my head, had to be arranged. If one was dying, it had
to be done in style if the dying took place in whitefolks’ part
of town.

On the other side of the bridge the ache seemed to lessen
as if a whitebreeze blew off the whitefolks and cushioned
everything in their neighborhood — including my jaw. The
gravel road was smoother, the stones smaller and the tree
branches hung down around the path and nearly covered us.
If the pain didn’t diminish then, the familiar yet strange sights
hypnotized me into believing that it had.

But my head continued to throb with the measured insis-
tence of a bass drum, and how could a toothache pass the cala-
boose, hear the songs of the prisoners, their blues and
laughter, and not be changed? How could one or two or even
a mouthful of angry tooth roots meet a wagonload of powhite-
trash children, endure their idiotic snobbery and not feel less
important?

Behind the building which housed the dentist’s office ran
a small path used by servants and those tradespeople who
catered to the butcher and Stamps’ one restaurant. Momma
and I followed that lane to the backstairs of Dentist Lincoln’s
office. The sun was bright and gave the day a hard reality as
we climbed up the steps to the second floor.

Momma knocked on the back door and a young white girl
opened it to show surprise at seeing us there. Momma said she
wanted to see Dentist Lincoln and to tell him Annie was
there. The girl closed the door firmly. Now the humiliation of
hearing Momma describe herself as if she had no last name to




188



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



189



the young white girl was equal to the physical pain. It seemed
terribly unfair to have a toothache and a headache and have to
bear at the same time the heavy burden of Blackness.

It was always possible that the teeth would quiet down
and maybe drop out of their own accord. Momma said we
would wait. We leaned in the harsh sunlight on the shaky rail-
ings of the dentist’s back porch for over an hour.

He opened the door and looked at Momma. “Well, Annie,
what can I do for you?”

He didn’t see the towel around my jaw or notice my
swollen face.

Momma said, “Dentist Lincoln. It’s my grandbaby here.
She got two rotten teeth that’s giving her a fit.”

She waited for him to acknowledge the truth of her state-
ment. He made no comment, orally or facially.

“She had this toothache purt’ near four days now, and
today I said, ‘Young Lady, you going to the Dentist.’ ”

“Annie?”

“Yes, sir, Dentist Lincoln.”

He was choosing words the way people hunt for shells.
“Annie, you know I don’t treat nigra, colored people.”

“I know, Dentist Lincoln. But this here is just my little
grandbaby, and she ain’t gone be no trouble to you . . .”

“Annie, everybody has a policy. In this world you have to
have a policy. Now, my policy is I don’t treat colored people.”

The sun had baked the oil out of Momma’s skin and
melted the Vaseline in her hair. She shone greasily as she
leaned out of the dentist’s shadow.

“Seem like to me, Dentist Lincoln, you might look after
her, she ain’t nothing but a little mite. And seems like maybe
you owe me a favor or two.”

He reddened slightly. “Favor or no favor. The money has



all been repaid to you and that’s the end of it. Sorry, Annie.”
He had his hand on the doorknob. “Sorry.” His voice was a bit
kinder on the second “Sorry,” as if he really was.

Momma said, “I wouldn’t press on you like this for myself
but I can’t take No. Not for my grandbaby. When you come
to borrow my money you didn’t have to beg. You asked me,
and I lent it. Now, it wasn’t my policy. I ain’t no moneylender,
but you stood to lose this building and I tried to help you out.”

“It’s been paid, and raising your voice won’t make me
change my mind. My policy . . .” He let go of the door and
stepped nearer Momma. The three of us were crowded on the
small landing. “Annie, my policy is I’d rather stick my hand in
a dog’s mouth than in a nigger’s.”

He had never once looked at me. He turned his back and
went through the door into the cool beyond. Momma backed
up inside herself for a few minutes. I forgot everything except
her face which was almost a new one to me. She leaned over
and took the doorknob, and in her everyday soft voice she
said, “Sister, go on downstairs. Wait for me. I’ll be there
directly.”

Under the most common of circumstances I knew it did
no good to argue with Momma. So I walked down the steep
stairs, afraid to look back and afraid not to do so. I turned as
-the door slammed, and she was gone.

Momma walked in that room as if she owned it. She shoved
that silly nurse aside with one hand and strode into the dentist’s
office. He was sitting in his chair, sharpening his mean instruments
and putting extra sting into his medicines. Her eyes were blazing
like live coals and her arms had doubled themselves in length. He
looked up at her just before she caught him by the collar of his
white jacket.

“Stand up when you see a lady, you contemptuous scoundrel . "



I




190



MAYA ANGELOU



Her- tongue had thinned and the words rolled off well enunciated.
Enunciated and sharp l iff little claps of thunder.

The dentist had no choice but to stand at R.O.T.C. attention.
His head dropped after a minute and his voice was humble. “Yes,
ma’am, Mrs. Henderson.”

“You ffiave, do you thin\ you acted liff a gentleman,
speaffng to me liff that in front of my granddaughter ?" She didn’t
shaff him, although she had the power. She simply held him
upright.

“No, ma’am, Mrs. Henderson.”

“No, ma’am, Mrs. Henderson, what?" Then she did give him
the tiniest of shaff s, but because of her strength the action set his
head and arms to shaffng loose on the ends of his body. He stut-
tered much worse than Uncle Willie. “No, ma’am. Mrs. Hen-
derson, I’m sorry. "

With just an edge of her disgust showing, Momma slung him
baff in his dentist s chair. Sorry is as sorry does, and you’re about
the sorriest dentist I ever laid my eyes on. ’’ (She could afford to slip
into the vernacular because she had such eloquent command of
English .)

I didn’t ask, you to apologize in front of Marguerite, because I
don t want her to ffiow my power, but I order you, now and here-
with. Leave Stamps by sundown. ”

“Mrs. Henderson, I can’t get my equipment ..." He was
shaffng terribly now.

Now, that brings me to my second order. You will never
again practice dentistry. Never! When you get settled in your next
place, you will be a vegetarian caring for dogs with the mange,
cats with the cholera and cows with the epizootic. Is that clear?"

The saliva ran down his chin and his eyes filled with tears.
Yes, ma am. Thank you for not fflling me. Thank y ou > Mrs.
Henderson. ’’



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 191

Momma pulled herself back from being ten feet tall with
eight-foot arms and said, “You’re welcome for nothing, you varlet,
I wouldn’t waste a fflling on the liffs of you. ”

On her way out she waved her handffrchief at the nurse and
turned her into a crocus sack °f chic ffn feed.

Momma looked tired when she came down the stairs, but
who wouldn’t be tired if they had gone through what she had.
She came close to me and adjusted the towel under my jaw
(I had forgotten the toothache; I only knew that she made her
hands gentle in order not to awaken the pain). She took my
hand. Her voice never changed. “Come on, Sister.”

I reckoned we were going home where she would concoct
a brew to eliminate the pain and maybe give me new teeth too.
New teeth that would grow overnight out of my gums. She
led me toward the drugstore, which was in the opposite direc-
tion from the Store. “I’m taking you to Dentist Baker in
Texarkana.”

I was glad after all that that I had bathed and put on Mum
and Cashmere Bouquet talcum powder. It was a wonderful
surprise. My toothache had quieted to solemn pain, Momma
had obliterated the evil white man, and we were going on a
trip to Texarkana, just the two of us.

On the Greyhound she took an inside seat in the back, and
I sat beside her. I was so proud of being her granddaughter
and sure that some of her magic must have come down to me.
She asked if I was scared. I only shook my head and leaned
over on her cool brown upper arm. There was no chance that
a dentist, especially a Negro dentist, would dare hurt me then.
Not with Momma there. The trip was uneventful, except that
she put her arm around me, which was very unusual for
Momma to do.

The dentist showed me the medicine and the needle



192



MAYA ANGELOU



before he deadened my gums, but if he hadn’t I wouldn’t have
worried. Momma stood right behind him. Her arms were
folded and she checked on everything he did. The teeth were
extracted and she bought me an ice cream cone from the side
window of a drug counter. The trip back to Stamps was quiet,
except that I had to spit into a very small empty snuff can
which she had gotten for me and it was difficult with the bus
humping and jerking on our country roads.

At home, I was given a warm salt solution, and when I
washed out my mouth I showed Bailey the empty holes,
where the clotted blood sat like filling in a pie crust. He said I
was quite brave, and that was my cue to reveal our confronta-
tion with the peckerwood dentist and Momma’s incredible
powers.

I had to admit that I didn’t hear the conversation, but
what else could she have said than what I said she said? What
else done? He agreed with my analysis in a lukewarm way,
and I happily (after all, I’d been sick) flounced into the Store.
Momma was preparing our evening meal and Uncle Willie
leaned on the door sill. She gave her version.

“Dentist Lincoln got right uppity. Said he’d rather put his
hand in a dog’s mouth. And when I reminded him of the
favor, he brushed it off like a piece of lint. Well, I sent Sister
downstairs and went inside, I hadn’t never been in his office
before, but I found the door to where he takes out teeth, and
him and the nurse was in there thick as thieves. I just stood
there till he caught sight of me.” Crash bang the pots on the
stove. “He jumped just like he was sitting on a pin. He said,
‘Annie, I done tole you, I ain’t gonna mess around in no
niggah’s mouth.’ I said, ‘Somebody’s got to do it then,’ and he
said, ‘Take her to Texarkana to the colored dentist’ and that’s
when I said, ‘If you paid me my money I could afford to take



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



192



her.’ He said, ‘It’s all been paid.’ I tole him everything but the
interest had been paid. He said, ‘ ’Twasn’t no interest.’ I said,
‘ ’Tis now. I’ll take ten dollars as payment in full.’ You know,
Willie, it wasn’t no right thing to do, ’cause I lent that money
without thinking about it.

‘He tole that little snippity nurse of his’n to give me ten
dollars and make me sign a ‘paid in full’ receipt. She gave it to
me and I signed the papers. Even though by rights he was
paid up before, I figger, he gonna be that kind of nasty, he
gonna have to pay for it.”

Momma and her son laughed and laughed over the white
man’s evilness and her retributive sin.

I preferred, much preferred, my version.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



195



CHAPTER 25

issgzj



Knowing Momma, I knew that I never knew Momma. Her
African-bush secretiveness and suspiciousness had been com-
pounded by slavery and confirmed by centuries of promises
made and promises broken. We have a saying among Black
Americans which describes Momma’s caution. “If you ask a
Negro where he’s been, he’ll tell you where he’s going.” To
understand this important information, it is necessary to
know who uses this tactic and on whom it works. If an
unaware person is told a part of the truth (it is imperative that
the answer embody truth), he is satisfied that his query has
been answered. If an aware person (one who himself uses the
stratagem) is given an answer which is truthful but bears only
slightly if at all on the question, he knows that the information
he seeks is of a private nature and will not be handed to him
willingly. Thus direct denial, lying and the revelation of per-
sonal affairs are avoided.

Momma told us one day that she was taking us to Cali-
fornia. She explained that we were growing up, that we
needed to be with our parents, that Uncle Willie was, after all,



crippled, that she was getting old. All true, and yet none of
those truths satisfied our need for The Truth. The Store and
the rooms in back became a going-away factory. Momma sat
at the sewing machine all hours, making and remaking
clothes for use in California. Neighbors brought out of their
trunks pieces of material that had been packed away for
decades in blankets of mothballs (I’m certain I was the only
girl in California who went to school in water-marked moire
skirts and yellowed satin blouses, satin-back crepe dresses and
crepe de Chine underwear).

Whatever the real reason, The Truth, for taking us to
California, I shall always think it lay mostly in an incident in
which Bailey had the leading part. Bailey had picked up the
habit of imitating Claude Rains, Herbert Marshall and George
McCready. I didn’t think it at all strange that a thirteen-
year-old boy in the unreconstructed Southern town of Stamps
spoke with an Englishy accent. His heroes included D’Artagnan
and the Count of Monte Cristo and he affected what he thought
were their swashbuckling gallantries.

On an afternoon a few weeks before Momma revealed her
plan to take us West, Bailey came into the Store shaking. His
little face was no longer black but a dirty, colorless gray. As
was our habit upon entering the Store, he walked behind the
candy counter and leaned on the cash register. Uncle Willie
had sent him on an errand to whitefolks’ town and he wanted
an explanation for Bailey’s tardiness. After a brief moment
our uncle could see that something was wrong, and feeling
unable to cope, he called Momma from the kitchen.

“What’s the matter, Bailey Junior?”

He said nothing. I knew when I saw him that it would be
useless to ask anything while he was in that state. It meant that
he had seen or heard of something so ugly or frightening that




196



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



197



he was paralyzed as a result. He explained when we were
smaller that when things were very bad his soul just crawled
behind his heart and curled up and went to sleep. When it
awoke, the fearful thing had gone away. Ever since we read
The Fall of the House of Usher, we had made a pact that neither
of us would allow the other to be buried without making
“absolutely, positively sure” (his favorite phrase) that the
person was dead. I also had to swear that when his soul was
sleeping I would never try to wake it, for the shock might
make it go to sleep forever. So I let him be, and after a while
Momma had to let him alone too.

I waited on customers, and walked around him or leaned
over him and, as I suspected, he didn’t respond. When the
spell wore off he asked Uncle Willie what colored people had
done to white people in the first place. Uncle Willie, who
never was one for explaining things because he took after
Momma, said little except that “colored people hadn’t even
bothered a hair on whitefolks’ heads.” Momma added that
some people said that whitefolks had come over to Africa (she
made it sound like a hidden valley on the moon) and stole the
colored people and made them slaves, but nobody really
believed it was true. No way to explain what happened “blows
and scores” ago, but right now they had the upper hand. Their
time wasn’t long, though. Didn’t Moses lead the children of
Israel out of the bloody hands of Pharaoh and into the
Promised Land? Didn’t the Lord protect the Hebrew chil-
dren in the fiery furnace and didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel?
We only had to wait on the Lord.

Bailey said he saw a man, a colored man, whom nobody
had delivered. He was dead. (If the news hadn’t been so
important, we would have been visited with one of Momma’s



outbursts and prayers. Bailey was nearly blaspheming.) He
said, “The man was dead and rotten. Not stinking but rotten.”
Momma ordered, “Ju, watch your tongue.”

Uncle Willie asked, “Who, who was it?”

Bailey was just tall enough to clear his face over the cash
register. He said, “When I passed the calaboose, some men
had just fished him out of the pond. He was wrapped in a
sheet, all rolled up like a mummy, then a white man walked
over and pulled the sheet off. The man was on his back but
the white man stuck his foot under the sheet and rolled him
over on the stomach.”

He turned to me. “My, he had no color at all. He was
bloated like a ball.” (We had had a running argument for
months. Bailey said there was no such thing as colorlessness,
and I argued that if there was color there also had to be an
opposite and now he was admitting that it was possible. But I
didn’t feel good about my win.) “The colored men backed off
and I did too, but the white man stood there, looking down,
and grinned. Uncle Willie, why do they hate us so much?”
Uncle Willie muttered, “They don’t really hate us. They
don’t know us. How can they hate us? They mostly scared.”
Momma asked if Bailey had recognized the man, but he
was caught in the happening and the event.

“Mr. Bubba told me I was too young to see something like
that and I oughta hightail it home, but I had to stay. Then the
white man called us closer. He said, ‘O.K., you boys, stretch
him out in the calaboose and when the Sheriff comes along
he’ll notify his people. This here’s one nigger nobody got to
worry about no more. He ain’t going nowhere else.’ Then the
men picked up corners of the sheet, but since nobody wanted
to get close to the man they held the very ends and he nearly



I



198



199



MAYA ANGELOU

rolled out on the ground. The white man called me to come
and help too.”

Momma exploded. “Who was it?” She made herself clear.
“Who was the white man?”

Bailey couldn’t let go of the horror. “I picked up a side of
the sheet and walked right in the calaboose with the men. I
walked in the calaboose carrying a rotten dead Negro.” His
voice was ancient with shock. He was literally bug-eyed.

The white man played like he was going to lock us all up
in there, but Mr. Bubba said, ‘Ow, Mr. Jim. We didn’t do it.
We ain t done nothing wrong.’ Then the white man laughed
and said we boys couldn’t take a joke, and opened the door.”
He breathed his relief. “Whew, I was glad to get out of there.
The calaboose, and the prisoners screaming they didn’t want
no dead nigger in there with them. That he’d stink up the
place. They called the white man ‘Boss.’ They said, ‘Boss,
surely we ain’t done nothing bad enough for you to put
another nigger in here with us, and a dead one at that.’ Then
they laughed. They all laughed like there was something
funny.”

Bailey was talking so fast he forgot to stutter, he forgot to
scratch his head and clean his fingernails with his teeth. He
was away in a mystery, locked in the enigma that young
Southern Black boys start to unravel, start to try to unravel,
from seven years old to death. The humorless puzzle of
inequality and hate. His experience raised the question of
worth and values, of aggressive inferiority and aggressive
arrogance. Could Uncle Willie, a Black man. Southern,
crippled moreover, hope to answer the questions, both asked
and unuttered? Would Momma, who knew the ways of the
whites and the wiles of the Blacks, try to answer her grandson.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

whose very life depended on his not truly understanding the
enigma? Most assuredly not.

They both responded characteristically. Uncle Willie said
something like he didn’t know what the world was coming to,
and Momma prayed, “God rest his soul, poor man.” I’m sure
she began piecing together the details of our California trip
that night.

Our transportation was Momma’s major concern for some
weeks. She had arranged with a railroad employee to provide
her with a pass in exchange for groceries. The pass allowed a
reduction in her fare only, and even that had to be approved,
so we were made to abide in a kind of limbo until white
people we would never see, in offices we would never visit,
signed and stamped and mailed the pass back to Momma. My
fare had to be paid in “ready cash.” That sudden drain on the
nickel-plated cash register lopsided our financial stability.
Momma decided Bailey couldn’t accompany us, since we had
to use the pass during a set time, but that he would follow
within a month or so when outstanding bills were paid.
Although our mother now lived in San Francisco, Momma
must have felt it wiser to go first to Los Angeles where our
father was. She dictated letters to me, advising them both that
we were on our way.

And we were on our way, but unable to say when. Our
clothes were washed, ironed and packed, so for an immobile
time we wore those things not good enough to glow under the
California sun. Neighbors, who understood the complications
of travel, said goodbye a million times.

“Well, if I don’ t see you before your ticket comes through.
Sister Henderson, have a good trip and hurry back home.” A
widowed friend of Momma’s had agreed to look after (cook.




200



MAYA ANGELOU



wash, clean and provide company for) Uncle Willie, and after
thousands of arrested departures, at last we left Stamps.

My sorrow at leaving was confined to a gloom at sepa-
rating from Bailey for a month (we had never been parted),
the imagined loneliness of Uncle Willie (he put on a good face,
though at thirty-five he’d never been separated from his
mother) and the loss of Louise, my first friend. I wouldn’t miss
Mrs. Flowers, for she had given me her secret word which
called forth a djinn who was to serve me all my life: books.



CHAPTER 26






The intensity with which young people live demands that
they “blank out” as often as possible. I didn’t actually think
about facing Mother until the last day of our journey. I was
“going to California.” To oranges and sunshine and movie
stars and earthquakes and (finally I realized) to Mother. My
old guilt came back to me like a much-missed friend. I won-
dered if Mr. Freeman’s name would be mentioned, or if I
would be expected to say something about the situation
myself. I certainly couldn’t ask Momma, and Bailey was a zil-
lion miles away.

The agony of wonder made the fuzzy seats hard, soured
the boiled eggs, and when I looked at Momma she seemed too
big and too black and very old-fashioned. Everything I saw
shuttered against me. The little towns, where nobody waved,
and the other passengers in the train, with whom I had
achieved an almost kinfolk relationship, disappeared into a
common strangeness.

I was as unprepared to meet my mother as a sinner is
reluctant to meet his Maker. And all too soon she stood before



202



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



203



I



me, smaller than memory would have her but more glorious
than any recall. She wore a light-tan suede suit, shoes to match
and a mannish hat with a feather in the band, and she patted
my face with gloved hands. Except for the lipsticked mouth,
white teeth and shining black eyes, she might have just
emerged from a dip in a beige bath. My picture of Mother and
Momma embracing on the train platform has been darkly
retained through the coating of the then embarrassment and
the now maturity. Mother was a blithe chick nuzzling around
the large, solid dark hen. The sounds they made had a rich
inner harmony. Momma’s deep, slow voice lay under my
mother s rapid peeps and chirps like stones under rushing
water.

The younger woman kissed and laughed and rushed
about collecting our coats and getting our luggage carted off.
She easily took care of the details that would have demanded
half of a country person’s day. I was struck again by the
wonder of her, and for the length of my trance, the greedy
uneasiness were held at bay.

We moved into an apartment, and I slept on a sofa that
miraculously transformed itself at night into a large comfort-
able bed. Mother stayed in Los Angeles long enough to get us
settled, then she returned to San Francisco to arrange living
accommodations for her abruptly enlarged family.

Momma and Bailey (he joined us a month after our
arrival) and I lived in Los Angeles about six months while our
permanent living arrangements were being concluded. Daddy
Bailey visited occasionally, bringing shopping bags of fruit.
He shone like a Sun God, benignly warming and brightening
his dark subjects.

Since I was enchanted with the creation of my own world,
years had to pass before I reflected on Momma’s remarkable



adjustment to that foreign life. An old Southern Negro
woman who had lived her life under the left breast of her
community learned to deal with white landlords, Mexican
neighbors and Negro strangers. She shopped in supermarkets
larger than the town she came from. She dealt with accents
that must have struck jarringly on her ears. She, who had
never been more than fifty miles from her birthplace, learned
to traverse the maze of Spanish-named streets in that enigma
that is Los Angeles.

She made the same kinds of friends she had always had.
On late Sunday afternoons before evening church services, old
women who were carbon copies of herself came to the apart-
ment to share leftovers from the Sunday meal and religious
talk of a Bright Hereafter.

When the arrangements for our move north were com-
pleted, she broke the shattering news that she was going back
to Arkansas. She had done her job. She was needed by Uncle
Willie. We had our own parents at last. At least we were in
the same state.

There were foggy days of unknowing for Bailey and me.
It was all well and good to say we would be with our parents,
but after all, who were they? Would they be more severe with
our didoes than she? That would be bad. Or more lax? Which
would be even worse. Would we learn to speak that fast lan-
guage? I doubted that, and I doubted even more that I would
ever find out what they laughed about so loudly and so often.

I would have been willing to return to Stamps even
without Bailey. But Momma left for Arkansas without me
and her solid air packed around her like cotton.

Mother drove us toward San Francisco over the big white
highway that would not have surprised me had it never



204



205



MAYA ANGELOU

ended. She talked incessantly and pointed out places of
interest. As we passed Capistrano she sang a popular song that
I d heard on the radio: “When the swallows come back to
Capistrano.”

She strung humorous stories along the road like a bright
wash and tried to captivate us. But her being, and her being
our mother, had done the job so successfully that it was a little
distracting to see her throwing good energy after good.

The big car was obedient under her one-hand driving,
and she pulled on her Lucky Strike so hard that her cheeks
were sucked in to make valleys in her face. Nothing could
have been more magical than to have found her at last, and
have her solely to ourselves in the closed world of a mov-
ing car.

Although we were both enraptured, neither Bailey nor I
was unaware of her nervousness. The knowledge that we had
the power to upset that goddess made us look at each other
conspiratorially and smile. It also made her human.

We spent a few dingy months in an Oakland apartment
which had a bathtub in the kitchen and was near enough to
the Southern Pacific Mole to shake at the arrival and depar-
ture of every train. In many ways it was St. Louis revisited —
along with Uncles Tommy and Billy — and Grandmother
Baxter of the pince-nez and strict carriage was again In Resi-
dence, though the mighty Baxter clan had fallen into hard
times after the death of Grandfather Baxter some years
earlier.

We went to school and no family member questioned the
output or quality of our work. We went to a playground
which sported a basketball court, a football field and Ping
Pong tables under awnings. On Sundays instead of going to
church we went to the movies.



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

I slept with Grandmother Baxter, who was afflicted with
chronic bronchitis and smoked heavily. During the day she
stubbed out half-finished cigarettes and put them in an ash-
tray beside her bed. At night when she woke up coughing she
fumbled in the dark for a butt (she called them “Willies”) and
after a blaze of light she smoked the strengthened tobacco
until her irritated throat was deadened with nicotine. For the
first weeks of sleeping with her, the shaking bed and scent of
tobacco woke me, but I readily became used to it and slept
peacefully through the night.

One evening after going to bed normally, I awoke to
another kind of shaking. In the blunted light through the
window shade I saw my mother kneeling by my bed. She
brought her face close to my ear.

Ritie,” she whispered, “Ritie. Come, but be very quiet.”
Then she quietly rose and left the room. Dutifully and in a
haze of ponderment I followed. Through the half-open
kitchen door the light showed Bailey’s pajamaed legs dan-
gling from the covered bathtub. The clock on the dining-
room table said 2:30. I had never been up at that hour.

I looked Bailey a question and he returned a sheepish
gaze. I knew immediately that there was nothing to fear.
Then I ran my mind through the catalogue of important
dates. It wasn’t anybody’s birthday, or April Fool’s Day, or
Halloween, but it was something.

Mother closed the kitchen door and told me to sit beside
Bailey. She put her hands on her hips and said we had been
invited to a party.

Was that enough to wake us in the middle of the night!
Neither of us said anything.

She continued, “I am giving a party and you are my hon-
ored and only guests.”




206



MAYA ANGELOU



She opened the oven and took out a pan of her crispy
brown biscuits and showed us a pot of milk chocolate on the
back of the stove. There was nothing for it but to laugh at
our beautiful and wild mother. When Bailey and I started
laughing, she joined in, except that she kept her finger in front
of her mouth to try to quiet us.

We were served formally, and she apologized for having
no orchestra to play for us but said she’d sing as a substitute.
She sang and did the Time Step and the Snake Hips and the
Suzy Q. What child can resist a mother who laughs freely and
often, especially if the child’s wit is mature enough to catch the
sense of the joke?

Mother’s beauty made her powerful and her power made
her unflinchingly honest. When we asked her what she did,
what her job was, she walked us to Oakland’s Seventh Street,
where dusty bars and smoke shops sat in the laps of storefront
churches. She pointed out Raincoat’s Pinochle Parlor and
Slim Jenkins pretentious saloon. Some nights she played
pinochle for money or ran a poker game at Mother Smith’s or
stopped at Slim’s for a few drinks. She told us that she had
never cheated anybody and wasn’t making any preparations
to do so. Her work was as honest as the job held by fat Mrs.
Walker (a maid), who lived next door to us, and “a damn sight
better paid. She wouldn’t bust suds for anybody nor be
anyone s kitchen bitch. The good Lord gave her a mind and
she intended to use it to support her mother and her children.
She didn’t need to add “And have a little fun along the way.”
In the street people were genuinely happy to see her.
“Hey, baby. What’s the news?”

“Everything’s steady, baby, steady.”

“How you doing, pretty?”



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 207

I can t win, ’cause of the shape I’m in.” (Said with a laugh
that belied the content.)

‘You all right, momma?”

“Aw, they tell me the whitefolks still in the lead.” (Said as
if that was not quite the whole truth.)

She supported us efficiently with humor and imagination.
Occasionally we were taken to Chinese restaurants or Italian
pizza parlors. We were introduced to Hungarian goulash and
Irish stew. Through food we learned that there were other
people in the world.

With all her jollity, Vivian Baxter had no mercy. There
was a saying in Oakland at the time which, if she didn’t say it
herself, explained her attitude. The saying was, “Sympathy is
next to shit in the dictionary, and I can’t even read.” Her
temper had not diminished with the passing of time, and
when a passionate nature is not eased with moments of com-
passion, melodrama is likely to take the stage. In each outburst
of anger my mother was fair. She had the impartiality of
nature, with the same lack of indulgence or clemency.

Before we arrived from Arkansas, an incident took place
that left the main actors in jail and in the hospital. Mother had
a business partner (who may have been a little more than that)
with whom she ran a restaurant cum gambling casino. The
partner was not shouldering his portion of the responsibility,
according to Mother, and when she confronted him he
became haughty and domineering, and he unforgivably called
her a bitch. Now, everyone knew that although she cursed as
freely as she laughed, no one cursed around her, and certainly
no one cursed her. Maybe for the sake of business arrange-
ments she restrained a spontaneous reaction. She told her
partner, I m going to be one bitch, and I’ve already been that



208



MAYA ANGELOU



one.” In a foolhardy gesture the man relieved himself of still
another “bitch” — and Mother shot him. She had anticipated
some trouble when she determined to speak to him and so had
taken the precaution to slip a little .32 in her big skirt pocket.

Shot once, the partner stumbled toward her, instead of
away, and she said that since she had intended to shoot him
(notice: shoot, not kill) she had no reason to run away, so she
shot him a second time. It must have been a maddening situa-
tion for them. To her, each shot seemed to impel him forward,
the reverse of her desire; and for him, the closer he got to her,
the more she shot him. She stood her ground until he reached
her and flung both arms around her neck, dragging her to the
floor. She later said the police had to untwine him before he
could be taken to the ambulance. And on the following day,
when she was released on bail, she looked in a mirror and
“had black eyes down to here.” In throwing his arms around
her, he must have struck her. She bruised easily.

The partner lived, though shot twice, and although the
partnership was dissolved they retained admiration for each
other. He had been shot, true, but in her fairness she had
warned him. And he had had the strength to give her two
black eyes and then live. Admirable qualities.

World War II started on a Sunday afternoon when I was
on my way to the movies. People in the streets shouted,
“We’re at war. We’ve declared war on Japan.”

I ran all the way home. Not too sure I wouldn’t be
bombed before I reached Bailey and Mother. Grandmother
Baxter calmed my anxiety by explaining that America would
not be bombed, not as long as Franklin Delano Roosevelt was
President. He was, after all, a politician’s politician and he
knew what he was doing.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 209

Soon after, Mother married Daddy Clidell, who turned
out to the be the first father I would know. He was a suc-
cessful businessman, and he and Mother moved us to San
Francisco. Uncle Tommy, Uncle Billy and Grandmother
Baxter remained in the big house in Oakland.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



211



CHAPTER 27

—



IN the early months of World War II, San Francisco’s Fill-
more district, or the Western Addition, experienced a visible
revolution. On the surface it appeared to be totally peaceful
and almost a refutation of the term “revolution.” The
Yakamoto Sea Food Market quietly became Sammy’s Shoe
Shine Parlor and Smoke Shop. Yashigira’s Hardware meta-
morphosed into La Salon de Beaute owned by Miss Clonnda
Jackson. The Japanese shops which sold products to Nisei cus-
tomers were taken over by enterprising Negro businessmen,
and in less than a year became permanent homes away from
home for the newly arrived Southern Blacks. Where the odors
of tempura, raw fish and cha had dominated, the aroma of
chitlings, greens and ham hocks now prevailed.

The Asian population dwindled before my eyes. I was
unable to tell the Japanese from the Chinese and as yet found
no real difference in the national origin of such sounds as
Ching and Chan or Moto and Kano.

As the Japanese disappeared, soundlessly and without
protest, the Negroes entered with their loud jukeboxes,



their just-released animosities and the relief of escape from
Southern bonds. The Japanese area became San Francisco’s
Harlem in a matter of months.

A person unaware of all the factors that make up oppres-
sion might have expected sympathy or even support from the
Negro newcomers for the dislodged Japanese. Especially in
view of the fact that they (the Blacks) had themselves under-
gone concentration-camp living for centuries in slavery’s
plantations and later in sharecroppers’ cabins. But the sensa-
tions of common relationship were missing.

The Black newcomer had been recruited on the desiccated
farm lands of Georgia and Mississippi by war-plant labor
scouts. The chance to live in two- or three-story apartment
buildings (which became instant slums), and to earn two- and
even three-figured weekly checks, was blinding. For the first
time he could think of himself as a Boss, a Spender. He was
able to pay other people to work for him, i.e. the dry cleaners,
taxi drivers, waitresses, etc. The shipyards and ammunition
plants brought to booming life by the war let him know that
he was needed and even appreciated. A completely alien yet
very pleasant position for him to experience. Who could
expect this man to share his new and dizzying importance
with concern for a race that he had never known to exist?

• . Another reason for his indifference to the Japanese
removal was more subtle but was more profoundly felt. The
Japanese were not whitefolks. Their eyes, language and cus-
toms belied the white skin and proved to their dark successors
that since they didn t have to be feared, neither did they have
to be considered. All this was decided unconsciously.

No member of my family and none of the family friends
ever mentioned the absent Japanese. It was as if they had never
owned or lived in the houses we inhabited. On Post Street,



212



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



213



I



where our house was, the hill skidded slowly down to Fill-
more, the market heart of our district. In the two short blocks
before it reached its destination, the street housed two day-
and-night restaurants, two pool halls, four Chinese restaurants,
two gambling houses, plus diners, shoeshine shops, beauty
salons, barber shops and at least four churches. To fully grasp
the never-ending activity in San Francisco’s Negro neighbor-
hood during the war, one need only know that the two blocks
described were side streets that were duplicated many times
over in the eight- to ten-square-block area.

The air of collective displacement, the impermanence of
life in wartime and the gauche personalities of the more recent
arrivals tended to dissipate my own sense of not belonging. In
San Francisco, for the first time, I perceived myself as part of
something. Not that I identified with the newcomers, nor
with the rare Black descendants of native San Franciscans,
nor with the whites or even the Asians, but rather with the
times and the city. I understood the arrogance of the young
sailors who marched the streets in marauding gangs,
approaching every girl as if she were at best a prostitute and at
worst an Axis agent bent on making the U.S.A. lose the war.
The undertone of fear that San Francisco would be bombed
which was abetted by weekly air raid warnings, and civil
defense drills in school, heightened my sense of belonging.
Hadn’t I, always, but ever and ever, thought that life was just
one great risk for the living?

Then the city acted in wartime like an intelligent woman
under siege. She gave what she couldn’t with safety withhold,
and secured those things which lay in her reach. The city
became for me the ideal ot what I wanted to be as a grownup.
Friendly but never gushing, cool but not frigid or distant, dis-
tinguished without the awful stiffness.



To San Franciscans “the City That Knows How” was the
Bay, the fog, Sir Francis Drake Hotel, Top o’ the Mark,
Chinatown, the Sunset District and so on and so forth and so
white. To me, a thirteen-year-old Black girl, stalled by the
South and Southern Black life style, the city was a state of
beauty and a state of freedom. The fog wasn’t simply the
steamy vapors off the bay caught and penned in by hills, but a
soft breath of anonymity that shrouded and cushioned the
bashful traveler. I became dauntless and free of fears, intoxi-
cated by the physical fact of San Francisco. Safe in my pro-
tecting arrogance, I was certain that no one loved her as
impartially as I. I walked around the Mark Hopkins and
gazed at the Top o’ the Mark, but (maybe sour grapes) was
more impressed by the view of Oakland from the hill than
by the tiered building or its fur-draped visitors. For weeks,
after the city and I came to terms about my belonging, I
haunted the points of interest and found them empty and un-
San Francisco. The naval officers with their well-dressed
wives and clean white babies inhabited another time-space
dimension than I. The well-kept old women in chauffeured
cars and blond girls in buckskin shoes and cashmere sweaters
might have been San Franciscans, but they were at most gilt
on the frame of my portrait of the city.

Pride and Prejudice stalked in tandem the beautiful hills.
Native San Franciscans, possessive of the city, had to cope
with an influx, not of awed respectful tourists but of raucous
unsophisticated provincials. They were also forced to live with
skin-deep guilt brought on by the treatment of their former
Nisei schoolmates.

Southern white illiterates brought their biases intact to the
West from the hills of Arkansas and the swamps of Georgia.
The Black ex-farmers had not left their distrust and fear of



214



MAYA ANGELOU



whites which history had taught them in distressful lessons.
These two groups were obliged to work side by side in the
war plants, and their animosities festered and opened like
boils on the face of the city.

San Franciscans would have sworn on the Golden Gate
Bridge that racism was missing from the heart of their air-
conditioned city. But they would have been sadly mistaken.

A story went the rounds about a San Franciscan white
matron who refused to sit beside a Negro civilian on the
streetcar, even after he made room for her on the seat. Her
explanation was that she would not sit beside a draft dodger
who was a Negro as well. She added that the least he could do
was fight for his country the way her son was fighting on Iwo
Jima. The story said that the man pulled his body away from
the window to show an armless sleeve. He said quietly and
with great dignity, “Then ask your son to look around for my
arm, which I left over there.”



CHAPTER 28

::53£J



Although my grades were very good (1 had been put up
two semesters on my arrival from Stamps), I found myself
unable to settle down in the high school. It was an institution
for girls near my house, and the young ladies were faster,
brasher, meaner and more prejudiced than any I had met at
Lafayette County Training School. Many of the Negro girls
were, like me, straight from the South, but they had known or
claimed to have known the bright lights of Big D (Dallas) or
T Town (Tulsa, Oklahoma), and their language bore up their
claims. They strutted with an aura of invincibility, and along
with some of the Mexican students who put knives in their tall
pompadours they absolutely intimidated the white girls and
those Black and Mexican students who had no shield of fear-
lessness. Fortunately I was transferred to George Washington
High School.

The beautiful buildings sat on a moderate hill in the white
residential district, some sixty blocks from the Negro neigh-
borhood. For the first semester, I was one of three Black stu-
dents in the school, and in that rarefied atmosphere I came to



216



217



MAYA ANGELOU

love my people more. Mornings as the streetcar traversed my
ghetto I experienced a mixture of dread and trauma. I knew
that all too soon we would be out of my familiar setting, and
Blacks who were on the streetcar when I got on would all be
gone and I alone would face the forty blocks of neat streets,
smooth lawns, white houses and rich children.

In the evenings on the way home the sensations were joy,
anticipation and relief at the first sign which said barbecue or
do drop inn or home cooking or at the first brown faces on
the streets. I recognized that I was again in my country.

In the school itself I was disappointed to find that I was
not the most brilliant or even nearly the most brilliant student.
The white kids had better vocabularies than I and, what
was more appalling, less fear in the classrooms. They never
hesitated to hold up their hands in response to a teacher’s
question; even when they were wrong they were wrong
aggressively, while I had to be certain about all my facts before
I dared to call attention to myself.

George Washington High School was the first real school
I attended. My entire stay there might have been time lost if it
hadn’t been for the unique personality ofia brilliant teacher.
Miss Kirwin was that rare educator who was in love with
information. I will always believe that her love of teaching
came not so much from her liking for students but from her
desire to make sure that some of the things she knew would
find repositories so that they could be shared again.

She and her maiden sister worked in the San Francisco
city school system for over twenty years. My Miss Kirwin,
who was a tall, florid, buxom lady with battleship-gray hair,
taught civics and current events. At the end of a term in her
class our books were as clean and the pages as stiff as they had



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

been when they were issued to us. Miss Kirwin’s students
were never or very rarely called upon to open textbooks.

She greeted each class with “Good day, ladies and
gentlemen.” I had never heard an adult speak with such
respect to teenagers. (Adults usually believe that a show of
honor diminishes their authority.) “In today’s Chronicle there
was an article on the mining industry in the Carolinas [or
some such distant subject]. I am certain that all of you have
read the article. I would like someone to elaborate on the sub-
ject for me.”

After the first two weeks in her class, I, along with all the
other excited students, read the San Francisco papers, Time
magazine, Life and everything else available to me. Miss
Kirwin proved Bailey right. He had told me once that “all
knowledge is spendable currency, depending on the market.”

There were no favorite students. No teacher’s pets. If a
student pleased her during a particular period, he could not
count on special treatment in the next day’s class, and that was
as true the other way around. Each day she faced us with a
clean slate and acted as if ours were clean as well. Reserved
and firm in her opinions, she spent no time in indulging the
frivolous.

She was stimulating instead of intimidating. Where some
of the other teachers went out of their way to be nice to me —
to be a liberal with me — and others ignored me completely,
Miss Kirwin never seemed to notice that I was Black and
therefore different. I was Miss Johnson and if I had the
answer to a question she posed I was never given any more
than the word Correct,” which was what she said to every
other student with the correct answer.

Years later when I returned to San Francisco I made visits
to her classroom. She always remembered that I was Miss




218



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



219



Johnson, who had a good mind and should be doing some-
thing with it. I was never encouraged on those visits to loiter
or linger about her desk. She acted as if I must have had other
visits to make. I often wondered if she knew she was the only
teacher I remembered.

I never knew why I was given a scholarship to the Cali-
fornia Labor School. It was a college for adults, and many
years later I found that it was on the House Un-American
Activities list of subversive organizations. At fourteen I
accepted a scholarship and got one for the next year as well.
In the evening classes I took drama and dance, along with
white and Black grownups. I had chosen drama simply
because I liked Hamlet’s soliloquy beginning, “To be, or not
to be.” I had never seen a play and did not connect movies
with the theater. In fact, the only times I had heard the solil-
oquy had been when I had melodramatically recited to
myself. In front of a mirror.

It was hard to curb my love for the exaggerated gesture
and the emotive voice. When Bailey and I read poems
together, he sounded like a fierce Basil Rathbone and I like a
maddened Bette Davis. At the California Labor School a
forceful and perceptive teacher quickly and unceremoniously
separated me from melodrama.

She made me do six months of pantomime.

Bailey and Mother encouraged me to take dance, and he
privately told me that the exercise would make my legs big
and widen my hips. I needed no greater inducement.

My shyness at moving clad in black tights around a large
empty room did not last long. Of course, at first, I thought
everyone would be staring at my cucumber-shaped body with
its knobs for knees, knobs for elbows and, alas, knobs for



breasts. But they really did not notice me, and when the
teacher floated across the floor and finished in an arabesque
my fancy was taken. I would learn to move like that. I would
learn to, in her words, “occupy space.” My days angled off
Miss Kirwin’s class, dinner with Bailey and Mother, and
drama and dance.

The allegiances I owed at this time in my life would have
made very strange bedfellows: Momma with her solemn
determination, Mrs. Flowers and her books, Bailey with his
love, my mother and her gaiety, Miss Kirwin and her infor-
mation, my evening classes of drama and dance.




I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



221



CHAPTER 29

sa3ig>.



Our house was a fourteen-room typical San Franciscan post-
Earthquake affair. We had a succession of roomers, bringing
and taking their different accents, and personalities and foods.
Shipyard workers clanked up the stairs (we all slept on the
second floor except Mother and Daddy Clidell) in their steel-
tipped boots and metal hats, and gave way to much-powdered
prostitutes, who giggled through their make-up and hung
their wigs on the doorknobs. One couple (they were college
graduates) held long adult conversations with me in the big
kitchen downstairs, until the husband went off to war. Then
the wife who had been so charming and ready to smile
changed into a silent shadow that played infrequently along
the walls. An older couple lived with us for a year or so. They
owned a restaurant and had no personality to enchant or
interest a teenager, except that the husband was called Uncle
Jim, and the wife Aunt Boy. I never figured that out.

The quality of strength lined with tenderness is an
unbeatable combination, as are intelligence and necessity
when unblunted by formal education. I was prepared to



accept Daddy Clidell as one more laceless name added to
Mother’s roster of conquests. I had trained myself so success-
fully through the years to display interest, or at least attention,
while my mind skipped free on other subjects that I could
have lived in his house without ever seeing him and without
his becoming the wiser. But his character beckoned and
elicited admiration. He was a simple man who had no inferi-
ority complex about his lack of education and, even more
amazing, no superiority complex because he had succeeded
despite that lack. He would say often, “I been to school three
years in my life. In Slaten, Texas, times was hard, and I had to
help my daddy on the farm.”

No recriminations lay hidden under the plain statement,
nor was there boasting when he said, “If I’m living a little
better now, it’s because I treats everybody right.”

He owned apartment buildings and, later, pool halls, and
was famous for being that rarity “a man of honor.” He didn’t
suffer, as many “honest men” do, from the detestable righ-
teousness that diminishes their virtue. He knew cards and
men’s hearts. So during the age when Mother was exposing us
to certain facts of life, like personal hygiene, proper posture,
table manners, good restaurants and tipping practices, Daddy
Clidell taught me to play poker, blackjack, tonk and high,
low, Jick, Jack and the Game. He wore expensively tailored
suits and a large yellow diamond stickpin. Except for the jew-
elry, he was a conservative dresser and carried himself with
the unconscious pomp of a man of secure means. Unexpect-
edly, I resembled him, and when he, Mother and I walked
down the street his friends often said, “Clidell, that’s sure your
daughter. Ain’t no way you can deny her.”

Proud laughter followed those declarations, for he had
never had children. Because of his late-arriving but intense




222 MAYA ANGELOU

paternal sense, I was introduced to the most colorful charac-
ters in the Black underground. One afternoon, I was invited
into our smoke-filled dining room to make the acquaintance
of Stonewall Jimmy, Just Black, Cool Clyde, Tight Coat and
Red Leg. Daddy Clidell explained to me that they were the
most successful con men in the world, and they were going to
tell me about some games so that I would never be “anybody’s
mark.”

To begin, one man warned me, “There ain’t never been a
mark yet that didn’t want something for nothing.” Then they
took turns showing me their tricks, how they chose their vic-
tims (marks) from the wealthy bigoted whites and in every
case how they used the victims’ prejudice against them.

Some of the tales were funny, a few were pathetic, but all
were amusing or gratifying to me, for the Black man, the con
man who could act the most stupid, won out every time over
the powerful, arrogant white.

I remember Mr. Red Leg’s story like a favorite melody.

“Anything that works against you can also work for you
once you understand the Principle of Reverse.

“There was a cracker in Tulsa who bilked so many
Negroes he could set up a Negro Bilking Company. Naturally
he got to thinking. Black Skin means Damn Fool. Just Black
and I went to Tulsa to check him out. Come to find out, he’s a
perfect mark. His momma must have been scared in an
Indian massacre in Africa. He hated Negroes only a little
more than he despised Indians. And he was greedy.

Black and I studied him and decided he was worth set-
ting up against the store. That means we were ready to put out
a few thousand dollars in preparation. We pulled in a white
boy from New York, a good con artist, and had him open an
office in Tulsa. He was supposed to be a Northern real estate



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS 223

agent trying to buy up valuable land in Oklahoma. We inves-
tigated a piece of land near Tulsa that had a toll bridge
crossing it. It used to be part of an Indian reservation but had
been taken over by the state.

Just Black was laid out as the decoy, and I was going to
be the fool. After our friend from New York hired a secretary
and had his cards printed. Black approached the mark with a
proposition. He told him that he had heard that our mark was
the only white man colored people could trust. He named
some of the poor fools that had been taken by that crook. It
just goes to show you how white folks can be deceived by their
own deception. The mark believed Black.

Black told him about his friend who was half Indian and
half colored and how some Northern white estate agent had
found out that he was the sole owner of a piece of valuable
land and the Northerner wanted to buy it. At first the man
acted like he smelled a rat, but from the way he gobbled up
the proposition, turns out what he thought he smelled was
some nigger money on his top lip.

He asked the whereabouts of the land but Black put him
off. He told his cracker that he just wanted to make sure that
he would be interested. The mark allowed how he was being
interested, so Black said he would tell his friend and they’d
get in touch with him. Black met the mark for about three
weeks in cars and in alleys and kept putting him off until the
white man was almost crazy with anxiety and greed and then
accidentally it seemed Black let drop the name of the
Northern real estate agent who wanted the property. From
that moment on we knew we had the big fish on the line and
all we had to do was to pull him in.

We expected him to try to contact our store, which
he did. That cracker went to our setup and counted on his



224



225



MAYA ANGELOU

whiteness to ally him with Spots, our white boy, but Spots
refused to talk about the deal except to say the land had been
thoroughly investigated by the biggest real estate concern in
the South and that if our mark did not go around raising dust
he would make sure that there would be a nice piece of money
in it for him. Any obvious inquiries as to the rightful owner-
ship of the land could alert the state and they would surely
push through a law prohibiting the sale. Spots told the mark
he would keep in touch with him. The mark went back to the
store three or four times but to no avail, then just before we
knew he would crack, Black brought me to see him. That fool
was as happy as a sissy in a C.C.C. camp. You would have
thought my neck was in a noose and he was about to light the
fire under my feet. I never enjoyed taking anybody so much.

“Anyhow, I played scary at first but Just Black told me
that this was one white man that our people could trust. I said
I did not trust no white man because all they wanted was to
get a chance to kill a Black man legally and get his wife in the
bed. (I’m sorry, Clidell.) The mark assured me that he was the
only white man who did not feel like that. Some of his best
friends were colored people. In fact, if I didn’t know it, the
woman who raised him was a colored woman and he still sees
her to this day. I let myself be convinced and then the mark
began to drag the Northern whites. He told me that they made
Negroes sleep in the street in the North and that they had to
clean out toilets with their hands in the North and even things
worse than that. I was shocked and said, ‘Then I don’t want
to sell my land to that white man who offered seventy-five
thousand dollars for it.’ Just Black said, ‘I wouldn’t know
what to do with that kind of money,’ and I said that all I
wanted was to have enough money to buy a home for my old
mom, to buy a business and to make one trip to Harlem. The



1 KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

mark asked how much would that cost and I said I reckoned I
could do it on fifty thousand dollars.

"The mark told me no Negro was safe with that kind of
money. That white folks would take it from him. I said I
knew it but I had to have at least forty thousand dollars. He
agreed. We shook hands. I said it would do my heart good to
see the mean Yankee go down on some of ‘our land.’ We met
the next morning and I signed the deed in his car and he gave
me the cash.

“Black and I had kept most of our things in a hotel over in
Hot Springs, Arkansas. When the deal was closed we walked
to our car, drove across the state line and on to Hot Springs.

“That’s all there was to it.”

When he finished, more triumphant stories rainbowed
around the room riding the shoulders of laughter. By all
accounts those storytellers, born Black and male before the
turn of the twentieth century, should have been ground into
useless dust. Instead they used their intelligence to pry open
the door of rejection and not only became wealthy but got
some revenge in the bargain.

It wasn’t possible for me to regard them as criminals or be
anything but proud of their achievements.

The needs of a society determine its ethics, and in the
Black American ghettos the hero is that man who is offered
only the crumbs from his country’s table but by ingenuity and
courage is able to take for himself a Lucullan feast. Hence the
janitor who lives in one room but sports a robin’s-egg-blue
Cadillac is not laughed at but admired, and the domestic who
buys forty-dollar shoes is not criticized but is appreciated. We
know that they have put to use their full mental and physical
powers. Each single gain feeds into the gains of the body
collective.



226



MAYA ANGELOU



Stories of law violations are weighed on a different set of
scales in the Black mind than in the white. Petty crimes
embarrass the community and many people wistfully wonder
why Negroes don’t rob more banks, embezzle more funds
and employ graft in the unions. “We are the victims of the
world’s most comprehensive robbery. Life demands a balance.
It’s all right if we do a little robbing now.” This belief appeals
particularly to one who is unable to compete legally with his
fellow citizens.

My education and that of my Black associates were quite
different from the education of our white schoolmates. In the
classroom we all learned past participles, but in the streets and
in our homes the Blacks learned to drop s ’ s from plurals and
suffixes from past-tense verbs. We were alert to the gap sepa-
rating the written word from the colloquial. We learned to
slide out of one language and into another without being con-
scious of the effort. At school, in a given situation, we might
respond with “That’s not unusual.” But in the street, meeting
the same situation, we easily said, “It he’s like that sometimes.”



CHAPTER 30





like Jane Withers and Donald O’Connor I was going on
a vacation. Daddy Bailey invited me to spend the summer
with him in southern California and I was jumpy with excite-
ment. Given our father’s characteristic air of superiority, I
secretly expected him to live in a manor house surrounded by
grounds and serviced by a liveried staff.

Mother was all cooperation in helping me to shop for
summer clothes. With the haughtiness San Franciscans have
for people who live in the warmer climate, she explained that
all I needed were lots of shorts, pedal pushers, sandals and
blouses because southern Californians hardly ever wear any-
thing else.”

Daddy Bailey had a girl friend, who had begun corre-
sponding with me some months before, and she was to meet
me at the train. We had agreed to wear white carnations to
identify each other, and the porter kept my flower in the
diner’s Frigidaire until we reached the small hot town.

On the platform my eyes skimmed over the whites and
searched among the Negroes who were walking up and down





228



229



MAYA ANGELOU

expectantly. There were no men as tall as Daddy, and no
really glamorous ladies (I had decided that given his first
choice, all his succeeding women would be startlingly beau-
tiful). I saw a little girl who wore a white flower, but dis-
missed her as improbable. The platform emptied as we
walked by each other time after time. Finally she stopped me
with a disbelieving “Marguerite?” Her voice screeched with
shock and maturity. So, after all, she wasn’t a little girl. I, too,
was visited with unbelief.

She said, “I’m Dolores Stockland.”

Stunned but trying to be well mannered, I said, “Hello.
My name is Marguerite.”

Daddy’s girl friend? I guessed her to be in her early twen-
ties. Her crisp seersucker suit, spectator pumps and gloves
informed me that she was proper and serious. She was of
average height but with the unformed body of a girl and I
thought that if she was planning to marry our father she must
have been horrified to find herself with a nearly six-foot
prospective stepdaughter who was not even pretty. (I found
later that Daddy Bailey had told her that his children were
eight and nine years old and cute as buttons. She had such a
need to believe in him that even though we corresponded at a
time when I loved the multisyllabic words and convoluted
sentences she had been able to ignore the obvious.)

I was another link in a long chain of disappointments.
Daddy had promised to marry her but kept delaying until he
finally married a woman named Alberta, who was another
small tight woman from the South. When I met Dolores she
had all the poses of the Black bourgeoisie without the material
basis to support the postures. Instead of owning a manor
house and servants, Daddy lived in a trailer park on the out-
skirts of a town that was itself the outskirts of town. Dolores



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

lived there with him and kept the house clean with the order-
liness of a coffin. Artificial flowers reposed waxily in glass
vases. She was on close terms with her washing machine and
ironing board. Her hairdresser could count on absolute
fidelity and punctuality. In a word, but for intrusions her life
would have been perfect. And then I came along.

She tried hard to make me into something she could rea-
sonably accept. Her first attempt, which failed utterly, con-
cerned my attention to details. I was asked, cajoled, then
ordered to care for my room. My willingness to do so was
hampered by an abounding ignorance of how it should be
done and a fumbling awkwardness with small objects. The
dresser in my room was covered with little porcelain white
women holding parasols, china dogs, fat-bellied cupids and
blown-glass animals of every persuasion. After making the
bed, sweeping my room and hanging up the clothes, if and
when I remembered to dust the bric-a-brac, I unfailingly held
one too tightly and crunched off a leg or two, or too loosely
and dropped it, to shatter it into miserable pieces.

Daddy wore his amused impenetrable face constantly. He
seemed positively diabolic in his enjoyment of our discomfort.
Certainly Dolores adored her outsize lover, and his elocution
(Daddy Bailey never spoke, he orated), spiced with the rolling
ers and errers, must have been some consolation to her in their
less-than-middle-class home. He worked in the kitchen of a
naval hospital and they both said he was a medical dietician
for the United States Navy. Their Frigidaire was always
stocked with newly acquired pieces of ham, half roasts and
quartered chickens. Dad was an excellent cook. He had been
in France during World War I and had also worked as
doorman at the exclusive Breakers’ Hotel; as a result he often
made Continental dinners. We sat down frequently to coq au




230



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



231



vin, prime ribs au jus, and cotelette Milanese with all the trim-
mings. His specialty, however, was Mexican food. He traveled
across the border weekly to pick up condiments and other
supplies that graced our table as polio en salsa verde and
enchilada con carne.

If Dolores had been a little less aloof, a little more earthy,
she could have discovered that those ingredients were rife in
her town proper, and Dad had no need to travel to Mexico to
buy provisions. But she would not be caught so much as
looking into one of the crusty Mexican mercados , let alone ven-
turing inside its smelliness. And it also sounded ritzy to say,
“My husband, Mr. Johnson, the naval dietician, went over to
Mexico to buy some things for our dinner.” That goes over
large with other ritzy people who go to the white area to buy
artichokes.

Dad spoke fluent Spanish, and since I had studied for a
year we were able to converse slightly. I believe that my talent
with a foreign language was the only quality I had that
impressed Dolores. Her mouth was too taut and her tongue
too still to attempt the strange sounds. Admittedly, though,
her English, like everything else about her, was absolutely
perfect.

We indulged in a test of strength for weeks as Dad stood
figuratively on the sidelines, neither cheering nor booing but
enjoying himself greatly. He asked me once if I “er liked errer
my mother.” I thought he meant my mother, so I answered
yes — she was beautiful and gay and very kind. He said he
wasn t talking about Vivian, he meant Dolores. Then I
explained that I didn’t like her because she was mean and
petty and full of pretense. He laughed, and when I added she
didn’t like me because I was so tall and arrogant and wasn’t



clean enough for her, he laughed harder and said something
like “Well, that’s life.”

One evening he announced that on the next day he was
going to Mexico to buy food for the weekend. There was
nothing unusual about his pronouncement until he added that
he was taking me along. He filled the shocked silence with the
information that a trip to Mexico would give me an opportu-
nity to practice Spanish.

Dolores’ silence might have been brought on by a jealous
reaction, but mine was occasioned by pure surprise. My father
had not shown any particular pride in me and very little affec-
tion. He had not taken me to his friends or to southern Cali-
fornia s few points of interest. It was incredible that I was to
be included in something as exotic as a trip to Mexico. Well, I
quickly reasoned, I deserved it. After all, I was his daughter
and my vacation fell far short of what I had expected a vaca-
tion to be. Had I protested that I would like Dolores to go
along, we might have been spared a display of violence and
near tragedy. But my young mind was filled with self, and my
imagination shivered at the prospect of seeing sombreros,
rancheros, tortillas and Pancho Villa. We spent a quiet night.
Dolores mended her perfect underwear, and I pretended to
read a novel. Dad listened to the radio with a drink in his
hand and watched what I now know was a pitiful spectacle.

In the morning, we set out on the foreign adventure. The
dirt roads of Mexico fulfilled all my longing for the unusual.
Only a few miles from California’s slick highways and, to me,
tall buildings, we were bumping along on gravel streets that
could have competed in crudeness with the worst paths in
Arkansas, and the landscape boasted adobe huts or cabins
walled with corrugated metal. Dogs, lean and dirty, slunk
around the houses, and children played innocently in the nude




232



233



MAYA ANGELOU

or near nude with discarded rubber tires. Half the population
looked like Tyrone Power and Dolores Del Rio, and the other
half like Akim Tamiroff and Katina Paxinou, maybe only
fatter and older.

Dad gave no explanation as we drove through the border
town and headed for the interior. Although surprised, I
refused to indulge my curiosity by questioning him. After a
few miles we were stopped by a uniformed guard. He and
Dad exchanged familiar greetings and Dad got out of the car.
He reached back into the pocket of the door and took a bottle
of liquor into the guard’s kiosk. They laughed and talked for
over a half hour as 1 sat in the car and tried to translate the
muffled sounds. Eventually they came out and walked to the
car. Dad still had the bottle but it was only half full. He asked
the guard if he would like to marry me. Their Spanish was
choppier than my school version but I understood. My father
added as an inducement the fact that I was only fifteen years
old. At once the guard leaned into the car and caressed my
cheek. I supposed that he thought before that I was not only
ugly but old, too, and that now the knowledge that I was
probably unused attracted him. He told Dad that he would
marry me and we would have “many babies.” My father
found that promise the funniest thing he had heard since we
left home. (He had laughed uproariously when Dolores didn’t
answer my goodbye and I explained as we drove away that she
hadn’t heard.) The guard was not discouraged by my attempts
to get away from his probing hands and I would have
squirmed to the driver’s seat had not Dad opened the door
and got in. After many adios’s and bonitas and espositas Dad
started the car, and we were on our grimy way again.

Signs informed me that we were headed for Ensenada. In
those miles, along the twisted roads beside the steep mountain,



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

I feared that I would never get back to America, civilization,
English and wide streets again. He sipped from the bottle and
sang snatches of Mexican songs as we climbed the tortuous
mountain road. Our destination turned out not to be the town
of Ensenada, after all, but about five miles out of the city
limits. We pulled up in the dirt yard of a cantina where half-
clothed children chased mean-looking chickens around and
around. The noise of the car brought women to the door of
the ramshackle building but didn’t distract the single-minded
activity of either the grubby kids or the scrawny fowls.

A woman’s voice sang out, “Baylee, Baylee.” And sud-
denly a claque of women crowded to the door and overflowed
into the yard. Dad told me to get out of the car and we went to
meet the women. He explained quickly that I was his
daughter, which everyone thought to be uncontrollably funny.
We were herded into a long room with a bar at one end.
Tables sat lopsidedly on a loose-plank floor. The ceiling
caught and held my attention. Paper streamers in every pos-
sible color waved in the near-still air, and as I watched a few
fell to the floor. No one seemed to notice, or if they did, it was
obviously unimportant that their sky was falling in. There
were a few men on stools at the bar, and they greeted my
father with the ease of familiarity. I was taken around and
each person was told my name and age. The formal high
school “Como esta usted?” was received as the most charming
utterance possible. People clapped me on the back, shook
Dad’s hand and spoke a rat-a-tat Spanish that I was unable to
follow. Baylee was the hero of the hour, and as he warmed
under the uninhibited show of affection I saw a new side of
the man. His quizzical smile disappeared and he stopped his
affected way of talking (it would have been difficult to wedge
<?rs into that rapid Spanish).




234



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



235



It seemed hard to believe that he was a lonely person,
searching relentlessly in bottles, under women’s skirts, in
church work and lofty job titles for his “personal niche,” lost
before birth and unrecovered since. It was obvious to me then
that he had never belonged in Stamps, and less to the slow-
moving, slow-thinking Johnson family. How maddening it
was to have been born in a cotton field with aspirations of
grandeur.

In the Mexican bar, Dad had an air of relaxation which I
had never seen visit him before. There was no need to pretend
in front of those Mexican peasants. As he was, just being him-
self, he was sufficiently impressive to them. He was an
American. He was Black. He spoke Spanish fluently. He
had money and he could drink tequila with the best of them.
The women liked him too. He was tall and handsome and
generous.

It was a fiesta party. Someone put money in the jukebox
and drinks were served to all the customers. I was given a
warm Coca-Cola. The music poured out of the record
machine as high-tenored voices wavered and held, wavered
and held for the passionate rancheros. Men danced, at first
alone, then with each other and occasionally a woman would
join the foot-stomping rites. I was asked to dance. I hesitated
because I wasn’t sure I’d be able to follow the steps, but Dad
nodded and encouraged me to try. I had been enjoying myself
for at least an hour before I realized it. One young man had
taught me how to put a sticker on the ceiling. First, all the
sugar must be chewed out of Mexican gum, then the bar-
tender gives a few slips of paper to the aspirant, who writes
either a proverb or a sentimental remark on the strip. He
takes the soft gum from his mouth and sticks it to the end of
the streamer. Choosing a less densely covered area of the



ceiling he aims at the spot, and as he throws he lets out a
bloodcurdling scream which would not be out of place in a
bronco-busting rodeo. After a few squeaky misses, I overcame
my reserve and tore my tonsils loose with a yell that would
have been worthy of Zapata. I was happy, Dad was proud and
my new friends were gracious. A woman brought chicharrones
(in the South they’re called cracklings) in a greasy newspaper.
I ate the fried pig skins, danced, screamed and drank the
extra-sweet and sticky Coca-Cola with the nearest approach to
abandonment I had ever experienced. As new revelers joined
the celebration I was introduced as la nina de Baylee, and as
quickly accepted. The afternoon sun failed in its attempt to
light the room through the single window, and the press of
bodies and scents and sounds melted to give us an aromatic
and artificial twilight. I realized that I hadn’t seen my father
for some time. “Donde esta mi padre?’’ I asked my dancing
partner. My formal Spanish must have sounded as pretentious
to the ears of the paisano as “Whither goeth my sire?” would
have sounded to a semi-literate Ozark mountaineer. In any
case it brought on a howl of laughter, a bear-crushing embrace
and no answer. When the dance was finished, I made my way
through the squeeze of the people as unobtrusively as possible.
A fog of panic nearly suffocated me. He wasn’t in the room.
Had he made an arrangement with the guard back at the
pass? I would not put it beyond him. My drink had been
spiked. The certainty made my knees weak, and dancing
couples blurred before my eyes. Dad was gone. He was
probably halfway back home with the money from my sale in
his pocket. I had to get to the door, which seemed miles and
mountains away. People stopped me with “Donde vas?" My
response was something as stiff and double meaning as “Yo



1




236



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



237



voy por ventilarme,” or “I am going to air out.” No wonder I
was a big hit.

Seen through the open door Dad’s Hudson sat in lonely
splendor. He hadn’t left me, after all. That meant, of course,
that I hadn’t been drugged. I immediately felt better. No one
followed me into the yard where the late afternoon sun had
tenderized the midday harshness. I decided to sit in his car
and wait for him since he couldn’t have gone far. I knew he
was with a woman, and the more I thought about it, it was
easy to figure which one of the gay senoritas he had taken
away. There had been a small neat woman with very red lips
who clung to him avidly when we first arrived. I hadn’t
thought of it at the time but had simply recorded her pleasure.
In the car, in reflection, I played the scene back. She had been
the first to rush to him, and that was when he quickly said
“This is my daughter” and “She speaks Spanish.” If Dolores
knew, she would crawl up in her blanket of affectations and
die circumspectly. The thought of her mortification kept me
company for a long time, but the sounds of music and
laughter and Cisco Kid screams broke into my pleasant
revengeful reveries. It was, after all, getting dark and Dad
must have been beyond my reach in one of the little cabins out
back. An awkward fear crept up slowly as I contemplated sit-
ting in the car all night alone. It was a fear distantly related to
the earlier panic. Terror did not engulf me wholly, but
crawled along my mind like a tedious paralysis. I could roll up
the windows and lock the door. I could lie down on the floor
of the car and make myself small and invisible. Impossible! I
tried to staunch the flood of fear. Why was I afraid of the
Mexicans? After all, they had been kind to me and surely my
father wouldn’t allow his daughter to be ill treated. Wouldn’t
he? Would he? How could he leave me in that raunchy bar



and go off with his woman? Did he care what happened to
me? Not a damn, I decided, and opened the flood gates for
hysteria. Once the tears began, there was no stopping them. I
was to die, after all, in a Mexican dirt yard. The special person
that I was, the intelligent mind that God and I had created
together, was to depart this life without recognition or contri-
bution. How pitiless were the Fates and how helpless was this
poor Black girl.

I made out his shadow in the near gloom and was about to
jump out and run to him when I noticed that he was being
propelled by the small woman I had seen earlier and a man.
He wobbled and lurched but they held him up firmly and
guided his staggering toward the door of the cantina. Once he
got inside we might never leave. I got out of the car and went
to them. I asked Dad if he wouldn’t like to get into the car and
rest a little. He focused enough to recognize me and answered
that that was exactly what he wanted; he was a little tired and
he’d like to rest before we set out for his place. He told his
friends his wishes in Spanish and they steered him to the car.
When I opened the front door he said No, he’d lie down on
the back seat for a little while. We got him into the car and
tried to arrange his long legs comfortably. He began snoring
even as we tugged at him. It sounded like the beginning of a
deep and long sleep, and a warning that, after all, we were to
spend the night in the car, in Mexico.

I thought fast as the couple laughed and jabbered at me in
incomprehensible Spanish. I had never driven a car before,
but I had watched carefully and my mother was declared to be
the best driver in San Francisco. She declared it, at least. I was
superbly intelligent and had good physical coordination. Of
course I could drive. Idiots and lunatics drove cars, why not
the brilliant Marguerite Johnson? I asked the Mexican man to




238



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



239



turn the car around, again in my exquisite high school
Spanish, and it took about fifteen minutes to make myself
understood. The man must have asked me if I could drive, but
I didn’t know the Spanish for the verb “to drive,” so I kept
repeating “St, si” and “Gracias” until he got in and headed the
car toward the highway. He showed his understanding of the
situation by his next action. He left the motor running. I put
my foot on the accelerator and clutch, jiggled the gear-shift
and raised both feet. With an ominous roar we leaped out of
the yard.

As we shook onto the shelf of the road the car nearly
stalled and I stamped both feet again on the pedal and clutch.
We made no progress and an awful amount of noise, but the
motor didn’t stop. I understood then that in order to go for-
ward I would have to lift my feet off the pedals, and if I did so
abruptly the car would shake like a person with St. Vitus
Dance. With that complete understanding of the principle of
motor locomotion, I drove down the mountainside toward
Calexico, some fifty miles away. It is hard to understand why
my vivid imagination and tendency toward scariness didn’t
provide me with gory scenes of bloody crashes on a risco de
Mexico. I can only think that my every sense was concentrated
on steering the bucking car.

When it became totally dark, I fumbled over knobs,
twisting and pulling until I succeeded in finding the lights.
The car slowed down as I centered on that search, and I forgot
to step on the pedals, and the motor gurgled, the car pitched
and the engine stopped. A bumbling sound from the back told
me that Dad had fallen off the seat (I had been expecting this
to happen for miles). I pulled the hand brake and carefully
considered my next move. It was useless to think of asking
Dad. The fall on the floor had failed to stir him, and I would



be unable to do so. No car was likely to pass us — I hadn’t seen
any motor vehicles since we passed the guard’s house early in
the day. We were headed downhill, so I reasoned that with
any luck we might coast right up to Calexico — or at least to
the guard. I waited until I formulated an approach to him
before releasing the brake. I would stop the car when we
reached the kiosk and put on my siddity air. I would speak to
him like the peasant he was. I would order him to start the car
and then tip him a quarter or even a dollar from Dad’s pocket
before driving on.

With my plans solidly made, I released the brake and we
began coasting down the slope. I also pumped the clutch and
the accelerator, hoping that the action would speed our
descent, and wonder of wonders the motor started again. The
Hudson went crazy on the hill. It was rebelling and would
have leaped over the side of the mountain, to all our destruc-
tion, in its attempt to unseat me had I relaxed control for a
single second. The challenge was exhilarating. It was me,
Marguerite, against the elemental opposition. As I twisted the
steering wheel and forced the accelerator to the floor I was
controlling Mexico, and might and aloneness and inexperi-
enced youth and Bailey Johnson, Sr., and death and insecurity,
and even gravity.

After what seemed like one thousand and one nights of
challenge the mountain began to level off and we started
passing scattered lights on either side of the road. No matter
what happened after that I had won. The car began to slow
down as if it had been tamed and was going to give up
without grace. I pumped even harder and we finally reached
the guard s box. I pulled on the hand brake and came to a
stop. There would be no need for me to speak to the guard
since the motor was running, but I had to wait until he looked



240



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



241



into the car and gave me the signal to continue. He was busy
talking to people in a car facing the mountain I had just con-
quered. The light from his hut showed him bent from the
waist with his upper torso completely swallowed by the
mouth of the open window. I held the car in instant readiness
for the next lap of our journey. When the guard unfolded
himself and stood erect I was able to see he was not the same
man of the morning’s embarrassment. I was understandably
taken aback at the discovery and when he saluted sharply and
barked “Pasa” I released the brake, put both feet down and
lilted them a bit too sharply. The car outran my intention. It
leaped not only forward but left as well, and with a few angry
spurts propelled itself onto the side of the car just pulling off.
The crash of scraping metal was followed immediately by a
volley of Spanish hurled at me from all directions. Again,
strangely enough, fear was absent from my sensations. I won-
dered in this order: was I hurt, was anyone else hurt, would I
go to jail, what were the Mexicans saying, and finally, had
Dad awakened? I was able to answer the first and last concern
promptly. Buoyed by the adrenaline that had flooded my
brain as we careened down the mountainside, I had never felt
better, and my father’s snores cut through the cacophony of
protestations outside my window. I got out of the car,
intending to ask for the polictas, but the guard beat me to the
punch. He said a few words, which were strung together like
beads, but one of them was polictas. As the people in the other
car fumbled out, I tried to recover my control and said loudly
and too graciously, “Gracias, senor.” The family, some eight or
more people of every age and size, walked around me, talking
heatedly and sizing me up as if I might have been a statue in a
city park and they were a flock of pigeons. One said “Joven,”
meaning I was young. I tried to see which one was so intelli-



gent. I would direct my conversation to him or her, but they
shifted positions so quickly it was impossible to make the
person out. Then another suggested “Borracho." Well, cer-
tainly, I must have smelled like a tequila farm, since Dad had
been breathing out the liquor in noisy respirations and I had
kept the windows closed against the cold night air. It wasn’t
likely that I would explain that to these strangers even if I
could. Which I couldn’t. Someone got the idea to look into the
car, and a scream brought us all up short. People — they
seemed to be in the hundreds — crowded to the windows
and more screams erupted. I thought for a minute that some-
thing awful might have happened. Maybe at the time of the
crash ... I, too, pushed to the window to see, but then I
remembered the rhythmic snores, and coolly walked away.
The guard must have thought he had a major crime on his
hands. He made moves and sounds like “Watch her” or
“Don’t let her out of your sight.” The family came back, this
time not as close but more menacing, and when I was able to
sort out one coherent question, “Quien es?” I answered dryly
and with all the detachment I could summon, “Mi padre. ”
Being a people of close family ties and weekly fiestas they sud-
denly understood the situation. I was a poor little girl thing
who was caring for my drunken father, who had stayed too
long at the fair. Pobrecita.

The guard, the father and one or two small children
began the herculean job of waking Dad. I watched coolly as
the remaining people paraded, making figure eights around
me and their badly bruised automobile. The two men shook
and tugged and pulled while the children jumped up and
down on my father’s chest. I credit the children’s action for
the success of the effort. Bailey Johnson, Sr., woke up in
Spanish. "Que tiene? Que pasa? Que quiere?” Anyone else





242



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



243



would have asked, “Where am IP” Obviously, this was a
common Mexican experience. When I saw he was fairly lucid
I went to the car, calmly pushed the people away, and said
from the haughty level of one who has successfully brought to
heel a marauding car and negotiated a sneaky mountain,
“Dad, there’s been an accident.” He recognized me by degrees
and became my pre-Mexican-fiesta father.

“An accident, huh? Er, who was at fault? You, Mar-
guerite? Errer was it you?”

It would have been futile to tell him of my mastering his
car and driving it nearly fifty miles. I didn’t expect or even
need, now, his approbation.

“Yes, Dad, I ran into a car.”

He still hadn’t sat up completely, so he couldn’t know
where we were. But from the floor where he rested, as if that
was the logical place to be, he said, “In the glove compart-
ment. The insurance papers. Get them and er give them to the
police, and then come back.”

The guard stuck his head in the other door before I could
form a scathing but polite response. He asked Dad to get out
of the car. Never at a loss, my father reached in the glove com-
partment, and took out the folded papers and the half bottle of
liquor he had left there earlier. He gave the guard one of his
pinch-backed laughs, and descended, by joints, from the car.
Once on the ground he towered over the angry people. He
took a quick reading of his location and the situation, and
then put his arm around the other driver’s shoulder. He
kindly, not in the least condescendingly, bent to speak to the
guard, and the three men walked into the hut. Within easy
minutes, laughter burst from the shack and the crisis was
over, but so was the enjoyment.

Dad shook hands with all the men, patted the children



and smiled winsomely at the women. Then, and without
looking at the damaged cars, he eased himself behind the
steering wheel. He called me to get in, and as if he had not
been helplessly drunk a half hour earlier, he drove unerringly
toward home. He said he didn’t know I could drive, and how
did I like his car? I was angry that he had recovered so quickly
and felt let down that he didn’t appreciate the greatness of my
achievement. So I answered yes to both the statement and the
question. Before we reached the border he rolled down the
window, and the fresh air, which was welcome, was uncom-
fortably cold. He told me to get his jacket from the back seat
and put it on. We drove into the city in a cold and private
silence.



i KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



245



l



CHAPTER 31

<Sjjg>



Dolores was sitting, it seemed, in the same place as the
night before. Her pose was so similar it was hard to believe she
had gone to sleep, eaten breakfast or even patted her firm
hairdo. Dad said sportily, “Hello, kid,” and walked toward
the bathroom. I greeted her: “Hello, Dolores” (we had long
dropped the pretense of familial relationship). She responded,
briefly but politely, and threaded her attention through the
eye of her needle. She was now prudently making cute
kitchen curtains, which would soon starchily oppose the wind.
Having nothing more to say, I went to my room. Within min-
utes an argument ensued in the living area that was as audible
to me as if the separating walls were muslin sheets.

“Bailey, you’ve let your children come between us.”

“Kid, you’re too sensitive. The children, er, my children,
can’t come between us, unless you let them.”

“How can I stop it?” — she was crying — “They’re doing
it.” Then she said, “You gave your daughter your jacket.”

“Was I supposed to let her freeze to death? Is that what
you’d like, kid?” He laughed. “You would, wouldn’t you?”



“Bailey, you know I wanted to like your children, but
they . . .” She couldn’t bring herself to describe us.

“Why the hell don’t you say what you mean? You’re a
pretentious little bitch, aren’t you? That’s what Marguerite
called you, and she’s right.”

I shivered to think how that revelation would add to her
iceberg of hate for me.

“Marguerite can go to hell, Bailey Johnson. I’m marrying
you, I don’t want to marry your children.”

“More pity for you, you unlucky sow. I am going out.
Goodnight.”

The front door slammed. Dolores cried quietly and broke
the piteous whimpers with sniffles and a few dainty nose
blows into her handkerchief.

In my room, I thought my father was mean and cruel. He
had enjoyed his Mexican holiday, and still was unable to
proffer a bit of kindness to the woman who had waited
patiently, busying herself with housewifely duties. I was cer-
tain that she knew he’d been drinking, and she must have
noticed that although we were away over twelve hours, we
hadn’t brought one tortilla into the house.

I felt sorry and even a little guilty. I had enjoyed myself,
too. I had been eating chtcharrones while she probably sat
praying for his safe return. I had defeated a car and a moun-
tain as she pondered over my father’s fidelity. There was
nothing fair or kind about the treatment, so I decided to go
out and console her. The idea of spreading mercy, indiscrimi-
nately, or, to be more correct, spreading it on someone I really
didn’t care about, enraptured me. I was basically good. Not
understood, and not even liked, but even so, just, and better
than just. I was merciful. I stood in the center of the floor but
Dolores never looked up. She worked the thread through the




246



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



247



t



flowered cloth as if she were sewing the torn ends of her life
together. I said, in my Florence Nightingale voice, “Dolores,

I don’t mean to come between you and Dad. I wish you’d
believe me.” There, it was done. My good deed balanced the
rest of the day.

With her head still bent she said, “No one was speaking
to you, Marguerite. It is rude to eavesdrop on other people’s
conversations.”

Surely she wasn’t so dumb as to think these paper walls
were made of marble. I let just the tiniest shred of impudence
enter my voice. “I’ve never eavesdropped in my life. A deaf
person would have been hard put not to hear what you said. I
thought I’d tell you that I have no interest in coming between
you and my father. That’s all.”

My mission had failed and succeeded. She refused to be
pacified, but I had shown myself in a favorable and Christian
light. I turned to go.

“No, that’s not all.” She looked up. Her face was puffy
and her eyes swollen red. “Why don’t you go back to your
mother? If you’ve got one.” Her tone was so subdued she
might have been telling me to cook a pot of rice. If I’ve got
one? Well, I’d tell her.

“I’ve got one and she’s worlds better than you, prettier,
too, and intelligent and — ”

“And” — her voice keened to a point — “she’s a whore.”
Maybe if I had been older, or had had my mother longer, or
understood Dolores’ frustration more deeply, my response
would not have been so violent. I know that the awful accusa-
tion struck not so much at my filial love as at the foundation of
my new existence. If there was a chance of truth in the charge,
I would not be able to live, to continue to live with Mother,
and I so wanted to.



I walked to Dolores, enraged at the threat. “I’m going to
slap you for that, you silly old bitch.” I warned her and I
slapped her. She was out of the chair like a flea, and before I
could jump back she had her arms around me. Her hair was
under my chin and she wrapped her arms, it seemed two or
three times, around my waist. I had to push her shoulders
with all my strength to unlock the octopus hold. Neither of us
made a sound until I finally shoved her back onto the sofa.
Then she started screaming. Silly old fool. What did she
expect if she called my mother a whore? I walked out of the
house. On the steps I felt something wet on my arm and
looked down to find blood. Her screams still sailed through
the evening air like skipping stones, but I was bleeding. I
looked carefully on my arm, but there was no cut. I put my
arm back to my waist and it brought fresh blood as I pulled it
away. I was cut. Before I could fully understand, or compre-
hend enough to respond, Dolores opened the door, screaming
still, and upon seeing me, instead of slamming the door she
ran like a mad woman down the stairs. I saw a hammer in her
hand, and without wondering if I would be able to take it
from her, I fled. Dad’s car sat in a yard twice in one day
offering magnificent refuge. I jumped in, rolled up the win-
dows and locked the door. Dolores flitted around the car,
-screaming like a banshee, her face bedizened with fury.

Daddy Bailey and the neighbors he was visiting responded
to the screams and crowded around her. She shouted that I
had jumped on her and tried to kill her and Bailey had better
not bring me back in the house. I sat in the car, feeling the
blood slip down to my buttocks as the people quieted and
cooled her rage. My father motioned to me to open the
window, and when I did he said he would take Dolores inside
but I should stay in the car. He would be back to attend to me.







248



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



249



The events of the day swarmed over me and made my
breathing difficult. After all the decisive victories of the day
my life was to end in sticky death. If Dad stayed a very long
time in the house, I was too afraid to go to the door and ask for
him, and besides, my feminine training would not allow me to
walk two steps with blood on my dress. As I had always
feared, no, known, the trials had been for nothing. (The dread
of futility has been my life-long plague.) Excitement, appre-
hension, release and anger had drained me of mobility. I
waited for Fate, the string puller, to dictate my movements.

My father came down the steps in a few minutes and
angrily slammed into the car. He sat in a corner of blood and I
gave no warning. He must have been pondering what to do
with me when he felt the damp on his trousers.

“What the hell is this?” He hunched himself up on a hip
and brushed the pants. His hand showed red in the porch’s
cast-off light. “What is this, Marguerite?”

I said with a coldness that would have done him proud,
“I’ve been cut.”

“What do you mean, cut?”

It only lasted a precious minute, but I managed once to see
my father perplexed.

“Cut.” It was so delicious. I didn’t mind draining away
into the plaid seat cushions.

“When? By whom?”

Daddy, even in a critical moment, wouldn’t say “By
who?”

“Dolores cut me.” The economy of words showed my con-
tempt for them all.

“How badly?”

I would have reminded him that I was no doctor and



therefore was ill equipped to do a thorough examination, but
impudence would have diminished my lead.

“I don’t know.”

He put the car in gear, smoothly, and I enviously realized
that although I had driven his car I didn’t know how to drive.

I thought we were en route to an emergency hospital, and
so with serenity I made plans for my death and will. As I
faded into time’s dateless night, I would say to the doctor,
“The moving finger writes and having writ, moves on . . .”
and my soul would escape gracefully. Bailey was to have my
books, my Lester Young records and my love from the next
world. I had groggily surrendered myself to oblivion when
the car stopped.

Dad said, “O.K., kid, errer let’s go.”

We were in a strange driveway, and even before I got out
of the car he was on the steps of a typical southern California
ranch-type house. The doorbell chimed, and he beckoned me
up the steps. When the door opened he signaled me to stand
outside. After all, I was dripping, and I could see the living
room was carpeted. Dad went in but didn’t quite close the
door, and a few minutes later a woman called to me in a
whisper from the side of the house. I followed her into a recre-
ation room, and she asked me where I was hurt. She was quiet
-and her concern seemed sincere. I pulled off my dress and we
both looked into the open flesh on my side. She was as pleased
as I was disappointed that the edges of the wound had begun
to clot. She washed witch hazel over the rupture and taped me
tightly with extra-long Band-Aids. Then we went into the
living room. Dad shook hands with the man he’d been talking
to and thanked my emergency nurse and we left.

In the car he explained that the couple were his friends
and he had asked the wife to look at me. He said he told her if




250



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



251






the laceration wasn’t too deep he would be grateful if she
treated it. Otherwise he’d have to take me to a hospital. Could
I imagine the scandal if people found out that his, Bailey
Johnson’s, daughter had been cut by his lady friend? He was
after all a Mason, an Elk, a naval dietician and the first Negro
deacon in the Lutheran church. No Negro in the city would
be able to hold his head up if our misfortune became common
knowledge. While the lady (I never knew her name) dressed
my wound he had telephoned other friends and made arrange-
ments for me to spend the night with them. At another strange
trailer, in yet another mobile park, I was taken in and given
night clothes and a bed. Dad said he’d see me around noon the
next day.

I went to bed and slept as if my death wish had come true.
In the morning neither the empty and unfamiliar surround-
ings nor the stiffness of my side bothered me. I made and ate
a big breakfast and sat down with a slick magazine to wait
for Dad.

At fifteen life had taught me undeniably that surrender, in
its place, was as honorable as resistance, especially if one had
no choice.

When my father came, with a jacket thrown over the
striped cotton uniform he wore as a naval dietician, he asked
how I felt, gave me a dollar and a half and a kiss, and said he’d
drop by late in the evening. He laughed as usual. Nervous?

Alone, I imagined the owners returning to find me in
their house, and realized that I didn’t even remember what
they looked like. How could I bear their contempt or their
pity? If I disappeared Dad would be relieved, not to mention
Dolores. I hesitated nearly too long. What would I do? Did I
have the nerve to commit suicide? If I jumped in the ocean
wouldn’t I come up all bloated like the man Bailey saw in



Stamps? The thought of my brother made me pause. What
would he do? I waited a patience and another patience and
then he ordered me to leave. But don’t kill yourself. You can
always do that if things get bad enough.

I made a few tuna sandwiches, lumpy with pickles, put a
Band-Aid supply in my pocket, counted my money (I had over
three dollars plus some Mexican coins) and walked out. When
I heard the door slam I knew the decision had jelled. I had no
key and nothing on earth would induce me to stand around
until Dad’s friends returned to pityingly let me back in.

Now that I was out free, I set to thinking of my future.
The obvious solution to my homelessness concerned me only
briefly. I could go home to Mother, but I couldn’t. I could
never succeed in shielding the gash in my side from her. She
was too perceptive not to notice the crusty Band-Aids and my
favoring the wound. And if I failed to hide the wound we
were certain to experience another scene of violence. I
thought of poor Mr. Freeman, and the guilt which lined my
heart, even after all those years, was a nagging passenger in
my mind.



1;




I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



253



CHAPTER 32





I spent the day wandering aimlessly through the bright
streets. The noisy penny arcades with their gaggle-giggle of
sailors and children and the games of chance were tempting,
but after walking through one of them it was obvious that I
could only win more chances and no money. I went to the
library and used a part of my day reading science fiction, and
in its marble washroom I changed my bandage.

On one flat street I passed a junkyard, littered with the
carcasses of old cars. The dead hulks were somehow so
uninviting that I decided to inspect them. As I wound my way
through the discards a temporary solution sprang to my mind.
I would find a clean or cleanish car and spend the night in it.
With the optimism of ignorance I thought that the morning
was bound to bring a more pleasant solution. A tall-bodied
gray car near the fence caught my eye. Its seats were untorn,
and although it had no wheels or rims it sat evenly on its
fenders. The idea of sleeping in the near open bolstered my
sense of freedom. I was a loose kite in a gentle wind floating
with only my will for an anchor. After deciding upon the car,



I got inside and ate the tuna sandwiches and then searched the
floorboards for holes. The fear that rats might scurry in and
eat off my nose as I slept (some cases had been recently
reported in the papers) was more alarming than the shadowed
hulks in the junkyard or the quickly descending night. My
gray choice, however, seemed rat-tight, and I abandoned my
idea of taking another walk and decided to sit steady and wait
for sleep.

My car was an island and the junkyard a sea, and I was all
alone and full of warm. The mainland was just a decision
away. As evening became definite the street lamps flashed on
and the lights of moving cars squared my world in a piercing
probing. I counted the headlights and said my prayers and fell
asleep.

The morning’s brightness drew me awake and I was sur-
rounded with strangeness. I had slid down the seat and slept
the night through in an ungainly position. Wrestling with my
body to assume an upward arrangement, I saw a collage of
Negro, Mexican and white faces outside the windows. They
were laughing and making the mouth gestures of talkers but
their sounds didn’t penetrate my refuge. There was so much
curiosity evident in their features that I knew they wouldn’t
just go away before they knew who I was, so I opened the
door, prepared to give them any story (even the truth) that
would buy my peace.

The windows and my grogginess had distorted their fea-
tures. I had thought they were adults and maybe citizens of
Brobdingnag, at least. Standing outside, I found there was
only one person taller than I, and that I was only a few years
younger than any of them. I was asked my name, where I
came from and what led me to the junkyard. They accepted
my explanation that I was from San Francisco, that my name




254



255



MAYA ANGELOU

was Marguerite but that I was called Maya and I simply had
no place to stay. With a generous gesture the tall boy, who said
he was Bootsie, welcomed me, and said I could stay as long as
I honored their rule: No two people of opposite sex slept
together. In fact, unless it rained, everyone had his own pri-
vate sleeping accommodations. Since some of the cars leaked,
bad weather forced a doubling up. There was no stealing, not
for reasons of morality but because a crime would bring the
police to the yard; and since everyone was underage, there was
the likelihood that they’d be sent off to foster homes or juve-
nile delinquent courts. Everyone worked at something. Most
of the girls collected bottles and worked weekends in greasy
spoons. The boys mowed lawns, swept out pool halls and ran
errands for small Negro-owned stores. All money was held by
Bootsie and used communally.

During the month that I spent in the yard I learned to
drive (one boy’s older brother owned a car that moved), to
curse and to dance. Lee Arthur was the only boy who ran
around with the gang but lived at home with his mother. Mrs.
Arthur worked nights, so on Friday evening all the girls went
to his house for a bath. We did our laundry in the Laun-
dromat, but those things that required ironing were taken to
Lee’s house and the ironing chore was shared, as was every-
thing else.

On Saturday night we entered the jitterbug contest at the
Silver Slipper, whether we could dance or not. The prizes
were tempting ($25 to first couple, $10 to second and $5 to
third), and Bootsie reasoned that if all of us entered we had a
better chance. Juan, the Mexican boy, was my partner, and
although he couldn’t dance any better than I, we were a sensa-
tion on the floor. He was very short with a shock of straight
black hair that swished around his head when he pivoted, and



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

I was thin and black and tall as a tree. On my last weekend at
the yard, we actually won the second prize. The dance we per-
formed could never be duplicated or described except to say
that the passion with which we threw each other around the
small dance area was similar to the zeal shown in honest wres-
tling matches and hand-to-hand combat.

After a month my thinking processes had so changed that
I was hardly recognizable to myself. The unquestioning
acceptance by my peers had dislodged the familiar insecurity.
Odd that the homeless children, the silt of war frenzy, could
initiate me into the brotherhood of man. After hunting down
unbroken bottles and selling them with a white girl from Mis-
souri, a Mexican girl from Los Angeles and a Black girl from
Oklahoma, I was never again to sense myself so solidly outside
the pale of the human race. The lack of criticism evidenced by
our ad hoc community influenced me, and set a tone of toler-
ance for my life.

I telephoned Mother (her voice reminded me of another
world) and asked her to send for me. When she said she was
going to send my air ticket to Daddy, I explained that it would
be easier if she simply sent my fare to the airline, then I’d pick
it up. With the easy grace characteristic of Mother when she
was given a chance to be magnanimous she agreed.

The unrestrained life we had led made me believe that my
new friends would be undemonstrative about my leaving. I
was right. After I picked up my ticket I announced rather
casually that I would be leaving the following day. My revela-
tion was accepted with at least the equal amount of detach-
ment (only it was not a pose) and everyone wished me well. I
didn’t want to say goodbye to the junkyard or to my car, so I
spent my last night at an all-night movie. One girl, whose
name and face have melted into the years, gave me “an




256



MAYA ANGELOU



all-enduring friendship ring,” and Juan gave me a black lace
handkerchief just in case I wanted to go to church sometime.

I arrived in San Francisco, leaner than usual, fairly
unkempt, and with no luggage. Mother took one look and
said, Is the rationing that bad at your father’s? You’d better
have some food to stick to all those bones.” She, as she called it,
turned to, and soon I sat at a clothed table with bowls of food,
expressly cooked for me.

I was at a home, again. And my mother was a fine lady.
Dolores was a fool and, more important, a liar.



CHAPTER 33




The house seemed smaller and quieter after the trip south,
and the first bloom of San Francisco’s glamour had dulled
around the edges. Adults had lost the wisdom from the sur-
face of their faces. I reasoned that I had given up some youth
for knowledge, but my gain was more valuable than the loss.

Bailey was much older too. Even years older than I had
become. He had made friends during that youth-shattering
summer with a group of slick street boys. His language had
changed. He was forever dropping slangy terms into his sen-
tences like dumplings in a pot. He may have been glad to see
me, but he didn’t act much like it. When I tried to tell him of
my adventures and misadventures, he responded with a casual
indifference which stilled the tale on my lips. His new com-
panions cluttered the living room and halls wearing zoot suits
and wide-brimmed hats and dangling long snaky chains
hooked at their belts. They drank sloe gin secretly and told
dirty jokes. Although I had no regrets, I told myself sadly that
growing up was not the painless process one would have
thought it to be.




258



MAYA ANGELOU



i KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



259



In one area my brother and I found ourselves closer. I had
gotten the knack of public dancing. All the lessons with
Mother, who danced so effortlessly, had not borne immediate
fruit. But with my newly and dearly bought assurance I could
give myself up to the rhythms and let them propel me where
they willed.

Mother allowed us to go to the big band dances in the
crowded city auditorium. We danced the jitterbug to Count
Basie, the Lindy and the Big Apple to Cab Calloway, and
the Half Time Texas Hop to Duke Ellington. In a matter of
months cute Bailey and his tall sister were famous as those
dancing fools (which was an apt description).

Although I had risked my life (not intentionally) in her
defense, Mother’s reputation, good name and community
image ceased, or nearly ceased, being of interest to me. It was
not that I cared for her less but that I concerned myself less
about everything and everyone. I often thought of the tedium
of life once one had seen all its surprises. In two months, I had
become blase.

Mother and Bailey were entangled in the Oedipal skein.
Neither could do without or do with the other; yet the con-
strictions of conscience and society, morality and ethos dic-
tated a separation. On some flimsy excuse, Mother ordered
Bailey out of the house. On an equally flimsy excuse he com-
plied. Bailey was sixteen, small for his age, bright for any and
hopelessly in love with Mother Dear. Her heroes were her
friends and her friends were big men in the rackets. They
wore two-hundred-dollar Chesterfield coats, Busch shoes at
fifty dollars a pair and Knox hats. Their shirts were mono-
grammed and their fingernails manicured. How could a
sixteen-year-old boy hope to compete with such overshad-



owing rivals? He did what he had to do. He acquired a with-
ered white prostitute, a diamond ring on his little finger and a
Harris tweed coat with raglan sleeves. He didn’t consciously
consider the new possessions the open sesame to Mother
Dear’s vault of acceptance. And she had no idea that her pref-
erences prodded him to such excesses.

From the wings I heard and watched the pavane of
tragedy move steadily toward its climax. Interception and
even the thought of it was impossible. Easier to plan an
obstruction to a sunrise or a hurricane. If Mother was a beau-
tiful woman who exacted the tribute of obeisance from all
men, she was also a mother, and “a damn good one.” No son
of hers was going to be exploited by a used-up white whore,
who wanted to milk him of his youth and spoil him for adult-
hood. Hell, no.

Bailey, for his part, was her son and she was his mother.
He had no intention of taking low even from the most beau-
tiful woman in the world. The fact that she happened to be his
mother did nothing to weaken his resolve.

Get out? Oh, hell, yes. Tomorrow? What’s wrong with
today? Today? What about right now? But neither could
move until all the measured steps had been negotiated.

During the weeks of bitter wrangling I sat in hopeless
.vyonder. We were not allowed profanity or even obvious sar-
casm, but Bailey looped his language around his tongue and
issued it out to Mother in alum drops. She threw her “ing
bings” (passionate explosions guaranteed to depilate the chest
of the strongest man) and was sweetly sorry (only to me) after.

I had been left out of their power/love struggles. It would
be more correct to say that since neither needed a claque I was
forgotten on the sidelines.

It was a little like Switzerland in World War II. Shells



260



MAYA ANGELOU



were bursting all around me, souls were tortured and I was
powerless in the confines of imposed neutrality — hopes were
dying. The confrontation, which brought relief, had come on
an ordinary unheralded evening. It was after eleven o’clock, so
I left my door ajar, hoping to hear Mother go out, or the creak
of Bailey easing up the stairs.

The record player on the first floor volumed up Lonnie
Johnson singing, “Tomorrow night, will you remember what
you said tonight?” Glasses clinked and voices rubbed each
other. A party was shimmering below and Bailey had defied
Mother’s eleven o’clock curfew. If he made it in before mid-
night, she might be satisfied with slapping him across the face
a few times with her lashing words.

Twelve o’clock came and went at once, and I sat up in bed
and laid my cards out for the first of many games of solitaire.

“Bailey!”

My watch hands made the uneven V of one o’clock.

Yes, Mother Dear?” En garde. His voice thrust sweet and
sour, and he accented the “dear.”

‘I guess you’re a man . . . Turn down that record player.”
She shouted the last to the revelers.

“I’m your son, Mother Dear.” A swift parry.

Is it eleven o clock, Bailey?” That was a feint, designed to
catch the opponent offguard.

It s after one o clock, Mother Dear.” He had opened up
the game, and the strokes from then on would have to be
direct.

“Clidell is the only man in this house, and if you think
you re so much of a man . . .” Her voice popped like a razor on
a strap.

I m leaving now, Mother Dear.” The deferential tone



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



261



heightened the content of his announcement. In a bloodless
coup he had thrust beneath her visor.

Now, laid open, she had no recourse but to hurry along
the tunnel of her anger, headlong.

“Then Goddammit, get your heels to clicking.” And her
heels were clicking down the linoleum hall as Bailey tap-
danced up the stairs to his room.

When rain comes finally, washing away a low sky of
muddy ocher, we who could not control the phenomenon are
pressed into relief. The near-occult feeling: The fact of being
witness to the end of the world gives way to tangible things.
Even if the succeeding sensations are not common, they are at
least not mysterious.

Bailey was leaving home. At one o’clock in the morning,
my little brother, who in my lonely days of inferno dwelling
had protected me from goblins, gnomes, gremlins and the
devils, was leaving home.

I had known all along the inevitable outcome and that I
dared not poke into his knapsack of misery, even with the
offer to help him carry it.

I went to his room, against my judgment, and found him
throwing his carefully tended clothes into a pillowcase. His
maturity embarrassed me. In his little face, balled up like a
fist, I found no vestige of my brother, and when, not knowing
what to say, I asked if I could help, he answered, “Leave me
the shit alone.’

I leaned on the doorjamb, lending him my physical pres-
ence but said no more.

She wants me out, does she? Well, I’ll get out of here so
fast 1 11 leave the air on fire. She calls herself a mother? Huh!
I’ll be damned. She’s seen the last of me. I can make it. I’ll
always make it.”




262



263



MAYA ANGELOU

At some point he noticed me still in the doorway, and his
consciousness stretched to remember our relationship.

“Maya, if you want to leave now, come on. I’ll take care of
you.”

He didn’t wait for an answer, but as quickly went back to
speaking to his soul. “She won’t miss me, and I sure as hell
won’t miss her. To hell with her and everybody else.”

He had finished jamming his shoes on top of his shirts and
ties, and socks were wadded into the pillowcase. He remem-
bered me again.

“Maya, you can have my books.”

My tears were not for Bailey or Mother or even myself
but for the helplessness of mortals who live on the sufferance
of Life. In order to avoid this bitter end, we would all have to
be born again, and born with the knowledge of alternatives.
Even then?

Bailey grabbed up the lumpy pillowcase and pushed by
me for the stairs. As the front door slammed, the record player
downstairs mastered the house and Nat King Cole warned
the world to “straighten up and fly right.” As if they could, as
if human beings could make a choice.

Mother’s eyes were red, and her face puffy, the next
morning, but she smiled her “everything is everything” smile
and turned in tight little moons, making breakfast, talking
business and brightening the corner where she was. No one
mentioned Bailey’s absence as if things were as they should be
and always were.

The house was smudged with unspoken thoughts and it
was necessary to go to my room to breathe. I believed I knew
where he headed the night before, and made up my mind to
find him and offer him my support. In the afternoon I went to
a bay-windowed house which boasted rooms, in green and



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

orange letters, through the glass. A woman of any age past
thirty answered my ring and said Bailey Johnson was at the
top of the stairs.

His eyes were as red as Mother’s had been, but his face had
loosened a little from the tightness of the night before. In an
almost formal manner I was invited into a room with a clean
chenille-covered bed, an easy chair, a gas fireplace and a table.

He began to talk, covering up the unusual situation that
we found ourselves in.

“Nice room, isn’t it? You know it’s very hard to find
rooms now. The war and all . . . Betty lives here [she was the
white prostitute] and she got this place for me . . . Maya, you
know, it’s better this way ... I mean, I’m a man, and I have to
be on my own . . .”

I was furious that he didn’t curse and abuse the Fates or
Mother or at least act put upon.

“Well” — I thought to start it — “If Mother was really a
mother, she wouldn’t have — ”

He stopped me, his little black hand held up as if I were to
read his palm. “Wait, Maya, she was right. There is a tide and
time in every man’s life — ”

“Bailey, you’re sixteen.”

“Chronologically, yes, but I haven’t been sixteen for years.
Anyway, there comes a time when a man must cut the apron
strings and face life on his own . . . As I was saying to Mother
Dear, I’ve come to — ”

“When were you talking to Mother ... ?”

“This morning, I said to Mother Dear — ”

“Did you phone her?”

“Yes. And she came by here. We had a very fruitful dis-
cussion” — he chose his words with the precision of a Sunday
school teacher — “She understands completely. There is a time




264



MAYA ANGELOU



in every man’s life when he must push off from the wharf of
safety into the sea of chance . . . Anyway, she is arranging with
a friend of hers in Oakland to get me on the Southern Pacific.
Maya, it’s just a start. I’ll begin as a dining-car waiter and then
a steward, and when I know all there is to know about that,
I’ll branch out . . . The future looks good. The Black man
hasn’t even begun to storm the battlefronts. I’m going for
broke myself.”

His room smelled of cooked grease, Lysol and age, but his
face believed the freshness of his words, and I had no heart
nor art to drag him back to the reeking reality of our life and
times.

Whores were lying down first and getting up last in the
room next door. Chicken suppers and gambling games were
rioting on a twenty-four-hour basis downstairs. Sailors and
soldiers on their doom-lined road to war cracked windows
and broke locks for blocks around, hoping to leave their
imprint on a building or in the memory of a victim. A chance
to be perpetrated. Bailey sat wrapped in his decision and anes-
thetized by youth. If I’d had any suggestion to make I couldn’t
have penetrated his unlucky armor. And, most regrettable, I
had no suggestion to make.

“I’m your sister, and whatever I can do, I’ll do it.”

Maya, don t worry about me. That’s all I want you to do.
Don’t worry. I’ll be okey-dokey.”

I left his room because, and only because, we had said all
we could say. The unsaid words pushed roughly against the
thoughts that we had no craft to verbalize, and crowded the
room to uneasiness.



CHAPTER 34

saaSY—



my room had all the cheeriness of a dungeon and the
appeal of a tomb. It was going to be impossible to stay there,
but leaving held no attraction for me, either. Running away
from home would be anticlimactic after Mexico, and a dull
story after my month in the car lot. But the need for change
bulldozed a road down the center of my mind.

I had it. The answer came to me with the suddenness of a
collision. I would go to work. Mother wouldn’t be difficult to
convince; after all, in school I was a year ahead of my grade
and Mother was a firm believer in self-sufficiency. In fact,
she d be pleased to think that I had that much gumption, that
much of her in my character. (She liked to speak of herself as
the original “do-it-yourself girl.”)

Once I had settled on getting a job, all that remained was
to decide which kind of job I was most fitted for. My intellec-
tual pride had kept me from selecting typing, shorthand or
filing as subjects in school, so office work was ruled out. War
plants and shipyards demanded birth certificates, and mine
would reveal me to be fifteen, and ineligible for work. So the




266



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



267



well-paying defense jobs were also out. Women had replaced
men on the streetcars as conductors and motormen, and the
thought of sailing up and down the hills of San Francisco in a
dark-blue uniform, with a money changer at my belt, caught
my fancy.

Mother was as easy as I had anticipated. The world was
moving so fast, so much money was being made, so many
people were dying in Guam, and Germany, that hordes of
strangers became good friends overnight. Life was cheap and
death entirely free. How could she have the time to think
about my academic career?

To her question of what I planned to do, I replied that I
would get a job on the streetcars. She rejected the proposal
with: “They don’t accept colored people on the streetcars.”

I would like to claim an immediate fury which was fol-
lowed by the noble determination to break the restricting
tradition. But the truth is, my first reaction was one of disap-
pointment. I’d pictured myself, dressed in a neat blue serge
suit, my money changer swinging jauntily at my waist, and a
cheery smile for the passengers which would make their own
work day brighter.

From disappointment, I gradually ascended the emotional
ladder to haughty indignation, and finally to that state of stub-
bornness where the mind is locked like the jaws of an enraged
bulldog.

I would go to work on the streetcars and wear a blue serge
suit. Mother gave me her support with one of her usual terse
asides, “That’s what you want to do? Then nothing beats a
trial but a failure. Give it everything you’ve got. I’ve told you
many times, ‘Can’t do is like Don’t Care.’ Neither of them
have a home.”

Translated, that meant there was nothing a person can’t



do, and there should be nothing a human being didn’t care
about. It was the most positive encouragement I could have
hoped for.

In the offices of the Market Street Railway Company, the
receptionist seemed as surprised to see me there as I was sur-
prised to find the interior dingy and the decor drab. Somehow
I had expected waxed surfaces and carpeted floors. If I had
met no resistance, I might have decided against working for
such a poor-mouth-looking concern. As it was, I explained
that I had come to see about a job. She asked, was I sent by an
agency, and when I replied that I was not, she told me they
were only accepting applicants from agencies.

The classified pages of the morning papers had listed
advertisements for motorettes and conductorettes and I
reminded her of that. She gave me a face full of astonishment
that my suspicious nature would not accept.

“I am applying for the job listed in this morning’s
Chronicle and I’d like to be presented to your personnel man-
ager.” While I spoke in supercilious accents, and looked at the
room as if I had an oil well in my own backyard, my armpits
were being pricked by millions of hot pointed needles. She
saw her escape and dived into it.

“He’s out. He’s out for the day. You might call tomorrow
and if he’s in, I’m sure you can see him.” Then she swiveled
her chair around on its rusty screws and with that I was sup-
posed to be dismissed.

“May I ask his name?”

She half turned, acting surprised to find me still there.

“His name? Whose name?”

“Your personnel manager.”




268



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



269



We were firmly joined in the hypocrisy to play out the
scene.

“The personnel manager? Oh, he’s Mr. Cooper, but I’m
not sure you’ll find him here tomorrow. He’s . . . Oh, but you
can try.”

“Thank you.”

“You’re welcome.”

And I was out of the musty room and into the even
mustier lobby. In the street I saw the receptionist and myself
going faithfully through paces that were stale with familiarity,
although I had never encountered that kind of situation
before and, probably, neither had she. We were like actors
who, knowing the play by heart, were still able to cry afresh
over the old tragedies and laugh spontaneously at the comic
situations.

The miserable litde encounter had nothing to do with me,
the me of me, any more than it had to do with that silly clerk.
The incident was a recurring dream, concocted years before by
stupid whites and it eternally came back to haunt us all. The
secretary and I were like Hamlet and Laertes in the final scene,
where, because of harm done by one ancestor to another, we
were bound to duel to the death. Also because the play must
end somewhere.

I went further than forgiving the clerk, I accepted her as a
fellow victim of the same puppeteer.

On the streetcar, I put my fare into the box and the con-
ductorette looked at me with the usual hard eyes of white con-
tempt. “Move into the car, please move on in the car.” She
patted her money changer.

Her Southern nasal accent sliced my meditation and I
looked deep into my thoughts. All lies, all comfortable lies.
The receptionist was not innocent and neither was I. The



whole charade we had played out in that crummy waiting
room had directly to do with me, Black, and her, white.

I wouldn’t move into the streetcar but stood on the ledge
over the conductor, glaring. My mind shouted so energetically
that the announcement made my veins stand out, and my
mouth tighten into a prune.

I WOULD HAVE THE JOB. I WOULD BE A CON-
DUCTORETTE AND SLING A FULL MONEY
CHANGER FROM MY BELT. I WOULD.

The next three weeks were a honeycomb of determination
with apertures for the days to go in and out. The Negro orga-
nizations to whom I appealed for support bounced me back
and forth like a shuttlecock on a badminton court. Why did I
insist on that particular job? Openings were going begging
that paid nearly twice the money. The minor officials with
whom I was able to win an audience thought me mad. Pos-
sibly I was.

Downtown San Francisco became alien and cold, and the
streets I had loved in a personal familiarity were unknown
lanes that twisted with malicious intent. Old buildings, whose
gray rococo fagades housed my memories of the Forty-Niners,
and Diamond Lil, Robert Service, Sutter and Jack London,
were then imposing structures viciously joined to keep me
out. My trips to the streetcar office were of the frequency of a
person on salary. The struggle expanded. I was no longer in
conflict only with the Market Street Railway but with the
marble lobby of the building which housed its offices, and ele-
vators and their operators.

During this period of strain Mother and I began our first
steps on the long path toward mutual adult admiration. She
never asked for reports and I didn’t offer any details. But
every morning she made breakfast, gave me carfare and lunch




270



MAYA ANG ELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



271



*



money, as if I were going to work. She comprehended the per-
versity of life, that in the struggle lies the joy. That I was no
glory seeker was obvious to her, and that I had to exhaust
every possibility before giving in was also clear.

On my way out of the house one morning she said, “Life is
going to give you just what you put in it. Put your whole heart
in everything you do, and pray, then you can wait.” Another
time she reminded me that “God helps those who help them-
selves.” She had a store of aphorisms which she dished out as
the occasion demanded. Strangely, as bored as I was with
cliches, her inflection gave them something new, and set me
thinking for a little while at least. Later when asked how I got
my job, I was never able to say exactly. I only knew that one
day, which was tiresomely like all the others before it, I sat in
the Railway office, ostensibly waiting to be interviewed. The
receptionist called me to her desk and shuffled a bundle of
papers to me. They were job application forms. She said they
had to be filled in triplicate. I had little time to wonder if I had
won or not, for the standard questions reminded me of the
necessity for dexterous lying. How old was I? List my pre-
vious jobs, starting from the last held and go backward to the
first. How much money did I earn, and why did I leave the
position? Give two references (not relatives).

Sitting at a side table my mind and I wove a cat’s ladder of
near truths and total lies. I kept my face blank (an old art) and
wrote quickly the fable of Marguerite Johnson, aged nineteen,
former companion and driver for Mrs. Annie Henderson (a
White Lady) in Stamps, Arkansas.

I was given blood tests, aptitude tests, physical coordina-
tion tests, and Rorschachs, then on a blissful day I was hired as
the first Negro on the San Francisco streetcars.

Mother gave me the money to have my blue serge suit tai-



lored, and I learned to fill out work cards, operate the money
changer and punch transfers. The time crowded together and
at an End of Days I was swinging on the back of the rackety
trolley, smiling sweetly and persuading my charges to “step
forward in the car, please.”

For one whole semester the streetcars and I shimmied up
and scooted down the sheer hills of San Francisco. I lost some
of my need for the Black ghetto’s shielding-sponge quality, as
I clanged and cleared my way down Market Street, with its
honky-tonk homes for homeless sailors, past the quiet retreat
of Golden Gate Park and along closed undwelled-in-looking
dwellings of the Sunset District.

My work shifts were split so haphazardly that it was easy
to believe that my superiors had chosen them maliciously.
Upon mentioning my suspicions to Mother, she said, “Don’t
worry about it. You ask for what you want, and you pay for
what you get. And I’m going to show you that it ain’t no
trouble when you pack double.”

She stayed awake to drive me out to the car barn at four
thirty in the mornings, or to pick me up when I was relieved
just before dawn. Her awareness of life’s perils convinced her
that while I would be safe on the public conveyances, she
“wasn’t about to trust a taxi driver with her baby.”

When the spring classes began, I resumed my commit-
ment with formal education. I was so much wiser and older,
so much more independent, with a bank account and clothes
that I had bought for myself, that I was sure that I had learned
and earned the magic formula which would make me a part
of the gay life my contemporaries led.

Not a bit of it. Within weeks, I realized that my school-
mates and I were on paths moving diametrically away from
each other. They were concerned and excited over the




272



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



272



approaehing football games, but I had in my immediate past
raced a car down a dark and foreign Mexican mountain. They
concentrated great interest on who was worthy of being stu-
dent body president, and when the metal bands would be
removed from their teeth, while I remembered sleeping for a
month in a wrecked automobile and conducting a streetcar in
the uneven hours of the morning.

Without willing it, I had gone from being ignorant of
being ignorant to being aware of being aware. And the worst
part of my awareness was that I didn’t know what I was
aware of. I knew I knew very little, but I was certain that the
things I had yet to learn wouldn’t be taught to me at George
Washington High School.

I began to cut classes, to walk in Golden Gate Park or
wander along the shiny counter of the Emporium Depart-
ment store. When Mother discovered that I was playing
truant, she told me that if I didn’t want to go to school one
day, if there were no tests being held, and if my school work
was up to standard, all I had to do was tell her and I could stay
home. She said that she didn’t want some white woman
calling her up to tell her something about her child that she
didn’t know. And she didn’t want to be put in the position of
lying to a white woman because I wasn’t woman enough to
speak up. That put an end to my truancy, but nothing
appeared to lighten the long gloomy day that going to school
became.

To be left alone on the tightrope of youthful unknowing is
to experience the excruciating beauty of full freedom and the
threat of eternal indecision. Few, if any, survive their teens.
Most surrender to the vague but murderous pressure of adult
conformity. It becomes easier to die and avoid conflicts than to
maintain a constant battle with the superior forces of maturity.



Until recently each generation found it more expedient to
plead guilty to the charge of being young and ignorant, easier
to take the punishment meted out by the older generation
(which had itself confessed to the same crime short years
before). The command to grow up at once was more bearable
than . the faceless horror of wavering purpose, which was
youth.

The bright hours when the young rebelled against the
descending sun had to give way to twenty-four-hour periods
called “days” that were named as well as numbered.

The Black female is assaulted in her tender years by all
those common forces of nature at the same time that she is
caught in the tripartite crossfire of masculine prejudice, white
illogical hate and Black lack of power.

The fact that the adult American Negro female emerges a
formidable character is often met with amazement, distaste
and even belligerence. It is seldom accepted as an inevitable
outcome of the struggle won by survivors and deserves respect
if not enthusiastic acceptance.




CHAPTER 35

ssag*



The Well of Loneliness was my introduction to lesbianism and
what I thought of as pornography. For months the book was
both a treat and a threat. It allowed me to see a litde of the
mysterious world of the pervert. It stimulated my libido and I
told myself that it was educational because it informed me of
the difficulties in the secret world of the pervert. I was certain
that I didn’t know any perverts. Of course I ruled out the jolly
sissies who sometimes stayed at our house and cooked whop-
ping eight-course dinners while the perspiration made paths
down their made-up faces. Since everyone accepted them, and
more particularly since they accepted themselves, I knew that
their laughter was real and that their lives were cheerful
comedies, interrupted only by costume changes and fresh-
ening of make-up.

But true freaks, the “women lovers,” captured yet strained
my imagination. They were, according to the book, disowned
by their families, snubbed by their friends and ostracized from
every society. This bitter punishment was inflicted upon them



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



275



because of a physical condition over which they had no
control.

After my third reading of The Well of Loneliness I became a
bleeding heart for the downtrodden misunderstood lesbians. I
thought “lesbian” was synonymous with hermaphrodite, and
when I wasn’t actively aching over their pitiful state, I was
wondering how they managed simpler body functions. Did
they have a choice of organs to use, and if so, did they alternate
or play favorite? Or I tried to imagine how two hermaphro-
dites made love, and the more I pondered the more confused I
became. It seemed that having two of everything other people
had, and four where ordinary people just had two, would com-
plicate matters to the point of giving up the idea of making love
at all.

It was during this reflective time that I noticed how heavy
my own voice had become. It droned and drummed two or
three whole tones lower than my schoolmates’ voices. My
hands and feet were also far from being feminine and dainty.
In front of the mirror I detachedly examined my body. For a
sixteen-year-old my breasts were sadly undeveloped. They
could only be called skin swellings, even by the kindest critic.
The line from my rib cage to my knees fell straight without
even a ridge to disturb its direction. Younger girls than I
boasted of having to shave under their arms, but my armpits
were as smooth as my face. There was also a mysterious
growth developing on my body that defied explanation. It
looked totally useless.

Then the question began to live under my blankets:
How did lesbianism begin? What were the symptoms? The
public library gave information on the finished lesbian— and
that woefully sketchy — but on the growth of a lesbian, there
was nothing. I did discover that the difference between




276



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



277



hermaphrodites and lesbians was that hermaphrodites were
“born that way.” It was impossible to determine whether les-
bians budded gradually, or burst into being with a suddenness
that dismayed them as much as it repelled society.

I had gnawed into the unsatisfying books and into my
own unstocked mind without finding a morsel of peace or
understanding. And meantime, my voice refused to stay up in
the higher registers where I consciously pitched it, and I had
to buy my shoes in the “old lady’s comfort” section of the shoe
stores.

I asked Mother.

Daddy Clidell was at the club one evening, so I sat down
on the side of Mother’s bed. As usual she woke completely and
at once. (There is never any yawning or stretching with
Vivian Baxter. She’s either awake or asleep.)

“Mother, I’ve go to talk to you . . .” It was going to kill me
to have to ask her, for in the asking wouldn’t it be possible that
suspicion would fall on my own normality? I knew her well
enough to know that if I committed almost any crime and told
her the truth about it she not only wouldn’t disown me but
would give me her protection. But just suppose I was devel-
oping into a lesbian, how would she react? And then there
was Bailey to worry about too.

“Ask me, and pass me a cigarette.” Her calmness didn’t
fool me for a minute. She used to say that her secret to life was
that she “hoped for the best, was prepared for the worst, so
anything in between didn’t come as a surprise.” That was all
well and good for most things but if her only daughter was
developing into a . . .

She moved over and patted the bed, “Come on, baby, get
in the bed. You’ll freeze before you get your question out.”

It was better to remain where I was for the time being.



“Mother . . . my pocketbook . . .”

‘Ritie, do you mean your vagina? Don’t use those Southern
terms. There’s nothing wrong with the word ‘vagina.’ It’s a
clinical description. Now, what’s wrong with it?”

The smoke collected under the bed lamp, then floated out
to be free in the room. I was deathly sorry that I had begun to
ask her anything.

Well? . . . Well? Have you got crabs?”

Since I didn’t know what they were, that puzzled me. I
thought I might have them and it wouldn’t go well for my
side if I said I didn t. On the other hand, I just might not have
them, and suppose I lied and said I did?

“I don’t know, Mother.”

“Do you itch? Does your vagina itch?” She leaned on one
elbow and jabbed out her cigarette.

“No, Mother.”

“Then you don’t have crabs. If you had them, you’d tell
the world.”

I wasn t sorry or glad not to have them, but made a mental
note to look up crabs” in the library on my next trip.

She looked at me closely, and only a person who knew her
face well could have perceived the muscles relaxing and inter-
preted this as an indication of concern.

You don’t have a venereal disease, do you?”

The question wasn t asked seriously, but knowing Mother
I was shocked at the idea. “Why, Mother, of course not. That’s
a terrible question. I was ready to go back to my room and
wrestle alone with my worries.

“Sit down, Ritie. Pass me another cigarette.” For a second
it looked as if she was thinking about laughing. That would
really do it. If she laughed, I’d never tell her anything
else. Her laughter would make it easier to accept my social



f




278



279



MAYA ANGELOU

isolation and human freakishness. But she wasn’t even
smiling. Just slowly pulling in the smoke and holding it in
puffed cheeks before blowing it out.

“Mother, something is growing on my vagina.”

There, it was out. I’d soon know whether I was to be her
ex-daughter or if she’d put me in a hospital for an operation.

“Where on your vagina, Marguerite?”

Uh-huh. It was bad all right. Not “Ritie” or “Maya” or
“Baby.” “Marguerite.”

“On both sides. Inside.” I couldn’t add that they were
fleshy skin flaps that had been growing for months down
there. She’d have to pull that out of me.

“Ritie, go get me that big Webster’s and then bring me a
bottle of beer.”

Suddenly, it wasn’t all that serious. I was “Ritie” again,
and she just asked for beer. If it had been as awful as I antici-
pated, she’d have ordered Scotch and water. I took her the
huge dictionary that she had bought as a birthday gift for
Daddy Clidell and laid it on the bed. The weight forced a side
of the mattress down and Mother twisted her bed lamp to
beam down on the book.

When I returned from the kitchen and poured her beer, as
she had taught Bailey and me beer should be poured, she
patted the bed.

“Sit down, baby. Read this.” Her fingers guided my eyes
to vulva. I began to read. She said, “Read it out loud.”

It was all very clear and normal-sounding. She drank the
beer as I read, and when I had finished she explained it in
every-day terms. My relief melted the fears and they liquidly
stole down my face.

Mother shot up and put her arms around me.



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

There s nothing to worry about, baby. It happens to
every woman. It’s just human nature.”

It was all right then to unburden my heavy, heavy heart. I
cried into the crook of my arm. “I thought maybe I was
turning into a lesbian.”

Her patting of my shoulder slowed to a still and she
leaned away from me.

A lesbian? Where the hell did you get that idea?”

Those things growing on my . . . vagina, and my voice is
too deep and my feet are big, and I have no hips or breasts or
anything. And my legs are so skinny.”

Then she did laugh. I knew immediately that she wasn’t
laughing at me. Or rather that she was laughing at me, but it
was something about me that pleased her. The laugh choked a
little on the smoke in its way, but finally broke through
cleanly. I had to give a small laugh too, although I wasn’t
tickled at all. But it’s mean to watch someone enjoy something
and now show your understanding of their enjoyment.

When she finished with the laughter, she laid it down a
peal at a time and turned to me, wiping her eyes.

I made arrangements, a long time ago, to have a boy and
a girl. Bailey is my boy and you are my girl. The Man upstairs,
He don’t make mistakes. He gave you to me to be my girl and
that s just what you are. Now, go wash your face, have a glass
of milk and go back to bed.”

I did as she said but I soon discovered my new assurance
wasn t large enough to fill the gap left by my old uneasiness. It
rattled around in my mind like a dime in a tin cup. I hoarded
it preciously, but less than two weeks later it became totally
worthless.

A classmate of mine, whose mother had rooms for herself
and her daughter in a ladies’ residence, had stayed out beyond




280



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



281



closing time. She telephoned me to ask if she could sleep at my
house. Mother gave her permission, providing my friend tele-
phoned her mother from our house.

When she arrived, I got out of bed and we went to the
upstairs kitchen to make hot chocolate. In my room we shared
mean gossip about our friends, giggled over boys and whined
about school and the tedium of life. The unusualness of
having someone sleep in my bed (I’d never slept with anyone
except my grandmothers) and the frivolous laughter in the
middle of the night made me forget simple courtesies. My
friend had to remind me that she had nothing to sleep in. I
gave her one of my gowns, and without curiosity or interest I
watched her pull off her clothes. At none of the early stages of
undressing was I in the least conscious of her body. And then
suddenly, for the briefest eye span, I saw her breasts. I was
stunned.

They were shaped like light-brown falsies in the five-and-
ten-cent store, but they were real. They made all the nude
paintings I had seen in museums come to life. In a word they
were beautiful. A universe divided what she had from what I
had. She was a woman.

My gown was too snug for her and much too long, and
when she wanted to laugh at her ridiculous image I found that
humor had left me without a promise to return.

Had I been older I might have thought that I was moved
by both an esthetic sense of beauty and the pure emotion of
envy. But those possibilities did not occur to me when I
needed them. All I knew was that I had been moved by
looking at a woman’s breasts. So all the calm and casual words
of Mother’s explanation a few weeks earlier and the clinical
terms of Noah Webster did not alter the fact that in a funda-
mental way there was something queer about me.



I somersaulted deeper into my snuggery of misery. After a
through self-examination, in the light of all I had read and
heard about dykes and bulldaggers, I reasoned that I had none
of the obvious traits — I didn’t wear trousers, or have big
shoulders or go in for sports, or walk like a man or even want
to touch a woman. I wanted to be a woman, but that seemed
to me to be a world to which I was to be eternally refused
entrance.

What I needed was a boyfriend. A boyfriend would clarify
my position to the world and, even more important, to myself.
A boyfriend’s acceptance of me would guide me into that
strange and exotic land of frills and femininity.

Among my associates, there were no takers. Understand-
ably the boys of my age and social group were captivated by
the yellow- or light-brown-skinned girls, with hairy legs and
smooth little lips, and whose hair “hung down like horses’
manes.” And even those sought-after girls were asked to “give
it up or tell where it is.” They were reminded in a popular
song of the times, “If you can’t smile and say yes, please don’t
cry and say no.” If the pretties were expected to make the
supreme sacrifice in order to “belong,” what could the un-
attractive female do? She who had been skimming along on
life’s turning but never-changing periphery had to be ready to
be a “buddy” by day and maybe by night. She was called upon
to be generous only if the pretty girls were unavailable.

I believe most plain girls are virtuous because of the
scarcity of opportunity to be otherwise. They shield them-
selves with an aura of unavailableness (for which after a time
they begin to take credit) largely as a defense tactic.

In my particular case, I could not hide behind the curtain
of voluntary goodness. I was being crushed by two unrelenting




282



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



283



forces: the uneasy suspicion that I might not be a normal
female and my newly awakening sexual appetite.

I decided to take matters into my own hands. (An unfor-
tunate but apt phrase.)

Up the hill from our house, and on the same side of the
street, lived two handsome brothers. They were easily the
most eligible young men in the neighborhood. If I was going
to venture into sex, I saw no reason why I shouldn’t make my
experiment with the best of the lot. I didn’t really expect to
capture either brother on a permanent basis, but I thought if I
could hook one temporarily I might be able to work the rela-
tionship into something more lasting.

I planned a chart for seduction with surprise as my
opening ploy. One evening as I walked up the hill suffering
from youth’s vague malaise (there was simply nothing to do),
the brother I had chosen came walking directly into my trap.

“Hello, Marguerite.” He nearly passed me.

I put the plan into action. “Hey.” I plunged, “Would you
like to have a sexual intercourse with me?” Things were going
according to the chart. His mouth hung open like a garden
gate. I had the advantage and so I pressed it.

“Take me somewhere.”

His response lacked dignity, but in fairness to him I admit
that I had left him little chance to be suave.

He asked, “You mean, you’re going to give me some
trim ? ”

I assured him that that was exactly what I was about to
give him. Even as the scene was being enacted I realized the
imbalance in his values. He thought I was giving him some-
thing, and the fact of the matter was that it was my intention
to take something from him. His good looks and popularity



had made him so inordinately conceited that they blinded him
to that possibility.

We went to a furnished room occupied by one of his
friends, who understood the situation immediately and got his
coat and left us alone. The seductee quickly turned off the
lights. I would have preferred them left on, but didn’t want to
appear more aggressive than I had been already. If that was
possible.

I was excited rather than nervous, and hopeful instead of
frightened. I had not considered how physical an act of seduc-
tion would be. I had anticipated long soulful tongued kisses
and gentle caresses. But there was no romance in the knee
which forced my legs, nor in the rub of hairy skin on my chest.

Unredeemed by shared tenderness, the time was spent in
laborious gropings, pullings, yankings and jerkings.

Not one word was spoken.

My partner showed that our experience had reached its
climax by getting up abruptly, and my main concern was how
to get home quickly. He may have sensed that he had been
used, or his disinterest may have been an indication that I was
less than gratifying. Neither possibility bothered me.

Outside on the street we left each other with little more
than “Okay, see you around.”

Thanks to Mr. Freeman nine years before, I had had no
pain of entry to endure, and because of the absence of
romantic involvement neither of us felt much had happened.

At home I reviewed the failure and tried to evaluate my
new position. I had had a man. I had been had. I not only
didn’t enjoy it, but my normalcy was still a question.

What happened to the moonlight-on-the-prairie feeling?
Was there something so wrong with me that I couldn’t share a
sensation that made poets gush out rhyme after rhyme, that




284



MAYA ANGELOU



made Richard Arlen brave the Arctic wastes and Veronica
Lake betray the entire free world?

There seems to be no explanation for my private infirmity,
but being a product (is “victim” a better word?) of the
Southern Negro upbringing, I decided that I “would under-
stand it all better by-and-by.” I went to sleep.

Three weeks later, having thought very little of the
strange and strangely empty night, I found myself pregnant.



CHAPTER 36




The world had ended, and I was the only person who knew
it. People walked along the streets as if the pavements hadn’t
all crumbled beneath their feet. They pretended to breathe in
and out while all the time I knew the air had been sucked
away in a monstrous inhalation from God Himself. I alone
was suffocating in the nightmare.

The little pleasure I was able to take from the fact that if I
could have a baby I obviously wasn’t a lesbian was crowded
into my mind’s tiniest corner by the massive pushing in of
fear, guilt and self-revulsion.

For eons, it seemed, I had accepted my plight as the hap-
less, put-upon victim of fate and the Furies, but this time I had
to face the fact that I had brought my new catastrophe upon
myself. How was I to blame the innocent man whom I had
lured into making love to me? In order to be profoundly dis-
honest, a person must have one of two qualities: either he is
unscrupulously ambitious, or he is unswervingly egocentric.
He must believe that for his ends to be served all things and
people can justifiably be shifted about, or that he is the center



286



MAYA ANGELOU



KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



287



not only of his own world but of the worlds which others
inhabit. I had neither element in my personality, so I hefted
the burden of pregnancy at sixteen onto my own shoulders
where it belonged. Admittedly, I staggered under the weight.

I finally sent a letter to Bailey, who was at sea with the
merchant marine. He wrote back, and he cautioned me
against telling Mother of my condition. We both knew her to
be violently opposed to abortions, and she would very likely
order me to quit school. Bailey suggested that if I quit school
before getting my high school diploma I’d find it nearly
impossible to return.

The first three months, while I was adapting myself to the
fact of pregnancy (I didn’t really link pregnancy to the possi-
bility of my having a baby until weeks before my confine-
ment), were a hazy period in which days seemed to lie just
below the water level, never emerging fully.

Fortunately, Mother was tied up tighter than Dick’s hat-
band in the weave of her own life. She noticed me, as usual,
out of the corner of her existence. As long as I was healthy,
clothed and smiling she felt no need to focus her attention on
me. As always, her major concern was to liye the life given to
her, and her children were expected to do the same. And to do
it without too much brouhaha.

Under her loose scrutiny I grew more buxom, and my
brown skin smoothed and tight-pored, like pancakes fried on
an unoiled skillet. And still she didn’t suspect. Some years
before, I had established a code which never varied. I didn’t
lie. It was understood that I didn’t lie because I was too proud
to be caught and forced to admit that I was capable of less than
Olympian action. Mother must have concluded that since I
was above out-and-out lying I was also beyond deceit. She was
deceived.



All my motions focalized on pretending to be that guile-
less schoolgirl who had nothing more wearying to think about
than mid-term exams. Strangely enough, I very nearly caught
the essence of teenage capriciousness as I played the role.
Except that there were times when physically I couldn’t deny
to myself that something very important was taking place in
my body.

Mornings, I never knew if I would have to jump off the
streetcar one step ahead of the warm sea of nausea that threat-
ened to sweep me away. On solid ground, away from the ship-
motioned vehicle and the smell of hands coated with recent
breakfasts, I regained my balance and waited for the next
trolley.

School recovered its lost magic. For the first time since
Stamps, information was exciting for itself alone. I burrowed
myself into caves of facts, and found delight in the logical reso-
lutions of mathematics.

I credit my new reactions (although I didn’t know at the
time that I had learned anything from them) to the fact that
during what surely must have been a critical period I was not
dragged down by hopelessness. Life had a conveyor-belt quality.
It went on unpursued and unpursuing, and my only thought
was to remain erect, and keep my secret along with my balance.

Midway along to delivery, Bailey came home and brought
me a spun-silver bracelet from South America, Thomas
Wolfe’s Lx>o\ Homeward, Angel, and a slew of new dirty jokes.

As my sixth month approached, Mother left San Francisco
for Alaska. She was to open a night club and planned to stay
three or four months until it got on its feet. Daddy Clidell was
to look after me but I was more or less left on my own recog-
nizance and under the unsteady gaze of our lady roomers.

Mother left the city amid a happy and cheerful send-off




288



MAYA ANGELOU



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS



289



party (after all how many Negroes were in Alaska?), and I felt
treacherous allowing her to go without informing her that she
was soon to be a grandmother.

Two days after V-Day, I stood with the San Francisco
Summer School class at Mission High School and received my
diploma. That evening, in the bosom of the now-dear family
home I uncoiled my fearful secret and in a brave gesture left a
note on Daddy Clidell’s bed. It read: Dear Parents, lam sorry to
bring this disgrace on the family, but I am pregnant. Marguerite.

The confusion that ensued when I explained to my step-
father that I expected to deliver the baby in three weeks, more
or less, was reminiscent of a Moliere comedy. Except that it
was funny only years later. Daddy Clidell told Mother that I
was “three weeks gone.” Mother, regarding me as a woman
for the first time, said indignantly, “She’s more than any three
weeks.” They both accepted the fact that I was further along
than they had first been told but found it nearly impossible to
believe that I had carried a baby, eight months and one week,
without their being any the wiser.

Mother asked, “Who is the boy?” I told her. She recalled
him, faintly.

“Do you want to marry him?”

“No.”

“Does he want to marry you?” The father had stopped
speaking to me during my fourth month.

“No.”

“Well, that’s that. No use ruining three lives.” There was
no overt or subtle condemnation. She was Vivian Baxter
Jackson. Hoping for the best, prepared for the worst, and
unsurprised by anything in between.

Daddy Clidell assured me that I had nothing to worry



about. That “women been gittin’ pregnant ever since Eve ate
that apple.” He sent one of his waitresses to I. Magnin’s to buy
maternity dresses for me. For the next two weeks I whirled
around the city going to doctors, taking vitamin shots and
pills, buying clothes for the baby, and except for the rare
moments alone, enjoying the imminent blessed event.

After a short labor, and without too much pain (I decided
that the pain of delivery was overrated), my son was born. Just
as gratefulness was confused in my mind with love, so posses-
sion became mixed up with motherhood. I had a baby. He was
beautiful and mine. Totally mine. No one had bought him for
me. No one had helped me endure the sickly gray months. I
had had help in the child’s conception, but no one could deny
that I had had an immaculate pregnancy.

Totally my possession, and I was afraid to touch him.
Home from the hospital, I sat for hours by his bassinet and
absorbed his mysterious perfection. His extremities were so
dainty they appeared unfinished. Mother handled him easily
with the casual confidence of a baby nurse, but I dreaded
being forced to change his diapers. Wasn’t I famous for awk-
wardness? Suppose I let him slip, or put my fingers on that
throbbing pulse on the top of his head?

Mother came to my bed one night bringing my three-
week-old baby. She pulled the cover back and told me to get
up and hold him while she put rubber sheets on my bed. She
explained that he was going to sleep with me.

I begged in vain. I was sure to roll over and crush out his
life or break those fragile bones. She wouldn’t hear of it, and
within minutes the pretty golden baby was lying on his back
in the center of my bed, laughing at me.

I lay on the edge of the bed, stiff with fear, and vowed not
to sleep all night long. But the eat-sleep routine I had begun in




290



MAYA ANGELOU



the hospital, and kept up under Mother’s dictatorial com-
mand, got the better of me. I dropped off.

My shoulder was shaken gently. Mother whispered,
“Maya, wake up. But don’t move.”

I knew immediately that the awakening had to do with
the baby. I tensed. “I’m awake.”

She turned the light on and said, “Look at the baby.” My
fears were so powerful I couldn t move to look at the center of
the bed. She said again, “Look at the baby.” I didn’t hear sad-
ness in her voice, and that helped me to break the bonds of
terror. The baby was no longer in the center of the bed. At
first I thought he had moved. But after closer investigation I
found that I was lying on my stomach with my arm bent at a
right angle. Under the tent of blanket, which was poled by my
elbow and forearm, the baby slept touching my side.

Mother whispered, “See, you don’t have to think about
doing the right thing. If you’re for the right thing, then you do
it without thinking.”

She turned out the light and I patted my son’s body lightly
and went back to sleep.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Maya Angelou, author of the bestselling Even the Stars Look
Lonesome, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Gather Together in
My Name, Singin and Swingin’ and Gettin Merry Like
Christmas, Wouldn’t Take Nothing for My Journey Now and the
Oprah Book Club selection The Heart of a Woman, has also
written five collections of poetry: Just Give Me a Cool Drink °f
Water fore I Diiie; Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well;
And Still I Rise; Shaker, Why Don’t You Sing? and I Shall Not Be
Moved, as well as On the Pulse of Morning, which was read by
her at the inauguration of President William Jefferson Clinton
on January 20, 1993. In theater, she produced, directed and
starred in Cabaret for Freedom in collaboration with Godfrey
Cambridge at New York’s Village Gate, starred in Genet’s The
Blacks at the St. Mark’s Playhouse and adapted Sophocles’
Ajax, which premiered at the Mark Taper Forum in Los
Angeles in 1974. In film and television, she wrote the original
screenplay and musical score for the film Georgia, Georgia and
wrote and produced a ten-part TV series on African traditions
in American life. In the sixties, at the request of Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr., she became Northern Coordinator for the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and in 1975 she
received the Ladies’ Home Journal Woman of the Year Award
in communications. She has received numerous honorary
degrees, was appointed by President Jimmy Carter to the
National Commission on the Observance of International
Women’s Year and by President Gerald R. Ford to the



American Revolution Bicentennial Advisory Council. She is
on the board of trustees of the American Film Institute. One of
the few female members of the Directors Guild, Angelou is the
author of the television screenplays 1 Know Why the Caged Bird
Sings and The Sisters. Most recently, she wrote the lyrics for the
musical King: Drum Major for Love and was both host and
writer for the series of documentaries Maya Angelou’ s America:
A Journey of the Heart, along with Guy Johnson. Angelou
is currently Reynolds Professor at Wake Forest University,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.



MAYA

ANGELOU

I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS

GATHER TOGETHER IN MY NAME

SINGIN’ AND SWINGIN’ AND GETTIN’
MERRY LIKE CHRISTMAS

THE HEART OF A WOMAN

MAYA ANGELOU: POEMS

WOULDN’T TAKE NOTHING FOR
MY JOURNEY NOW

I SHALL NOT BE MOVED

EVEN THE STARS LOOK LONESOME
