
The Finder

I.   In the Dark Time

THIS IS THE FIRST PAGE of the Book of the Dark, written some six
hundred years ago in Berila, on Enlad:

“After Elfarran and Morred perished and the Isle of Solea sank beneath the
sea, the Council of the Wise governed for the child Serriadh until he took the
throne. His reign was bright but brief. The kings who followed him in Enlad
were seven, and their realm increased in peace and wealth. Then the dragons
came to raid among the western lands, and wizards went out in vain against
them. King Akambar moved the court from Berila in Enlad to the City of
Havnor, whence he sent out his fleet against invaders from the Kargad Lands
and drove them back into the East. But still they sent raiding ships even as far
as the Inmost Sea. Of the fourteen Kings of Havnor the last was Maharion,
who made peace both with the dragons and the Kargs, but at great cost. And
after the Ring of the Runes was broken, and Erreth-Akbe  died with the great
dragon, and Maharion the Brave was killed by treachery, it seemed that no
good thing happened in the Archipelago.

“Many claimed Maharion’s throne, but none could keep it, and the quarrels of
the claimants divided all loyalties. No commonwealth was left and no justice,
only the will of the wealthy. Men of noble houses, merchants, and pirates, any
who could hire soldiers and wizards called himself a lord, claiming lands and
cities as his property. The warlords made those they conquered slaves, and
those they hired were in truth slaves, having only their masters to safeguard
them from rival warlords seizing the lands, and sea-pirates raiding the ports,
and bands and hordes of lawless, miserable men dispossessed of their living,
driven by hunger to raid and rob.”

The Book of the Dark, written late in the time it tells of, is a compilation  of
self-contradictory histories, partial biographies, and garbled legends. But it’s
the best of the records that survived the dark years. Wanting praise, not
history, the warlords burnt the books in which the poor and powerless might
learn what power is.

But when the lore-books of a wizard came into a warlord’s hands he was
likely to treat them with caution, locking them away to keep them harmless or
giving them to a wizard in his hire to do with as he wished. In the margins of
the spells and word lists and in the endpapers  of these books of lore a wizard
or his prentice might record a plague, a famine, a raid, a change of masters,


along with the spells worked in such events and their success or unsuccess.
Such random records reveal a clear moment here and there, though all
between those moments is darkness. They are like glimpses of a lighted ship
far  out at sea, in darkness, in the rain.

And there are songs, old lays and ballads from small islands and from the
quiet uplands of  Havnor, that tell the story of those years.

Havnor Great Port is the city at the heart of the world, white-towered  above
its bay; on the tallest tower the sword of Erreth-Akbe catches the first and 
last
of daylight. Through that city passes all the trade and commerce and learning
and craft of Earthsea, a wealth not hoarded. There the King sits, having
returned after the healing of the Ring, in sign of healing. And in that city, in
these latter days, men and women of the islands speak with dragons, in sign
of change.

But Havnor is also the Great Isle, a broad, rich land; and in the villages 
inland
from the port, the farmlands of the slopes of  Mount Onn, nothing ever
changes much. There a song worth singing is likely to be sung again. There
old   men at the tavern talk of Morred as if they had known him when they too
were young and heroes. There girls walking out to fetch the cows home tell
stories of the women of the Hand, who are forgotten everywhere else in the
world, even on Roke, but remembered among those silent, sunlit roads and
fields and in the kitchens by the hearths where housewives work and talk.

In the time of the kings, mages gathered in the court of Enlad and later in the
court of Havnor to counsel the king and take counsel together, using their arts
to pursue goals they agreed were good. But in the dark years, wizards sold
their skills to the highest bidder, pitting their powers one against the other 
in
duels and combats of sorcery, careless of the evils they did, or worse than
careless. Plagues and famines, the failure of springs of water, summers with
no     rain and years with no summer, the birth of sickly and monstrous young to
sheep and cattle, the birth of sickly and monstrous children to the people of
the isles-all these things were charged to the practices of wizards and witches,
and all too often rightly so.

So it became dangerous to practice sorcery, except under the protection of a
strong warlord; and even then, if a wizard met up with one whose powers
were greater than his own, he might be destroyed. And if a wizard let down
his guard among the common folk, they too might destroy him if they could,
seeing him as the source of the worst evils they suffered, a malign being. In
those years, in the minds of most people, all magic was black.

It was then that village sorcery, and above all women’s witchery, came into
the ill repute that has clung to it since. Witches paid dearly for practicing 
the


arts they thought of as their own. The care of pregnant beasts and women,
birthing, teaching the songs and rites, the fertility and order of field and
garden,     the building and care of the house and its furniture, the mining of 
ores
and metals-these great things had always been in the charge of women. A rich
lore of spells and charms to ensure the good outcome of such undertakings
was shared among the witches. But when things went wrong at the binh, or in
the field, that would be the witches’ fault. And things went wrong more often
than right, with the wizards warring, using poisons and curses recklessly to
gain immediate advantage without thought for what followed after. They
brought drought and storm, blights and fires and sicknesses across the land,
and     the village witch was punished for them. She didn’t know why her charm
of healing caused the wound to gangrene, why the child she brought into the
world was imbecile, why her blessing seemed to burn the seed in the furrows
and blight the apple on the tree. But for these ills, somebody had to be to
blame: and the witch or sorcerer was there, right there in the village or the
town,  not off in the warlord’s castle or fort, not protected by armed men and
spells of defense. Sorcerers and witches were drowned in the poisoned wells,
burned in the withered fields, buried alive to make the dead earth rich again.

So the practice of their lore and the teaching of it had become perilous. Those
who undertook it were often those already outcast, crippled, deranged,
without family, old-women  and men who had little to lose. The wise man and
wise woman, trusted and held in reverence, gave way to the stock figures of
the shuffling, impotent village sorcerer with his trickeries, the hag-witch with
her potions used in aid of lust, jealousy, and malice. And a child’s gift for
magic became a thing to dread and hide.

This is a tale of those times. Some of it is taken from the Book of the Dark,
and some comes from Havnor, from the upland farms of Onn and the
woodlands of Faliern. A story may be pieced together from such scraps and
fragments, and though it will be an airy quilt, half made of hearsay and half of
guesswork, yet it may be true enough. It’s a tale of the Founding of Roke, and
if          the Masters of Roke say it didn’t happen so, let them tell us how it
happened otherwise. For a cloud hangs over the time when Roke first became
the    Isle of the Wise, and it may be that the wise men put it there.

II. Otter

There was an otter in our brook
That every mortal semblance took,
Could any spell of magic make,


And speak the tongues of man and drake.

So runs the water away, away,
So runs the water away.

OTTER WAS THE SON of a boatwright who worked in the shipyards of
Havnor Great Port. His mother gave him his country name; she was a farm
woman from Endlane village, around nonhwest of Mount Onn. She had come
to   the city seeking work, as many came. Decent folk in a decent trade in
troubled times, the boatwright and his family were anxious not to come to
notice   lest they come to grief. And so, when it became clear that the boy had 
a
gift of magery, his father tried to beat it out of him.

“You might as well beat a cloud for raining,” said Otter’s mother.
“Take care you don’t beat evil into him,” said his aunt.

“Take care he doesn’t turn your belt on you with a spell!” said his uncle.

But the boy played no tricks against his father. He took his beatings in silence
and learned to hide his gift.

It didn’t seem to him to amount to much. It was such an easy matter to him to
make a silvery light shine in a dark room, or find a lost pin by thinking about
it, or true up a warped joint by running his hands over the wood and talking to
it, that he couldn’t see why they made a fuss over such things. But his father
raged at him for his “shortcuts,” even struck him once on the mouth when he
was talking to the work, and insisted that he do his carpentry with tools, in
silence.

His mother tried to explain. “It’s as if you’d found some great jewel,” she
said, “and what’s one of us to do with a diamond but hide it? Anybody rich
enough to buy it from you is strong enough to kill you for it. Keep it hid. And
keep away from great people and their crafty men!”

“Crafty men” is what they called wizards in those days.

One of the gifts of power is to know power. Wizard knows wizard, unless the
concealment  is very skillful. And the boy had no skills at all except in boat-
building, of which he was a promising scholar by the age of twelve. About
that time the midwife who had helped his mother at his birth came by and said
to his parents, “Let Otter come to me in the evenings after work. He should
learn the songs and be prepared for his naming day.”

That was all right, for she had done the same for Otter’s elder sister, and so
his parents sent him to her in the evenings. But she taught Otter more than the


song of the Creation. She knew his gift. She and some men and women like
her, people of no fame and some of questionable reputation, had all in some
degree that gift; and they shared, in secret, what lore and craft they had. “A
gift untaught is a ship unguided,” they said to Otter, and they taught him all
they knew. It wasn’t much, but there were some beginnings of the great arts in
it; and though he felt uneasy at deceiving his parents, he couldn’t resist this
knowledge, and the kindness and praise of his poor teachers. “It will do you
no        harm if you never use it for harm,” they told him, and that was easy 
for
him to promise them.

At the stream Serrenen, where it runs within the north wall of the city, the
midwife gave Otter his true name, by which he is remembered in islands far
from Havnor.

Among these people was an old man whom they called, among themselves,
the Changer. He showed Otter a few spells of illusion; and when the boy was
fifteen or so, the old man took him out into the fields by Serrenen to show
him  the one spell of true change he knew. “First let’s see you turn that bush
into the seeming of a tree,” he said, and promptly Otter did so. Illusion came
so easy to the boy that the old man took alarm. Otter had to beg and wheedle
him for any further teaching and finally to promise him, swearing on his own
true and secret name, that if he learned the Changer’s great spell he would
never use it but to save a life, his own or another’s.

Then the old man taught it to him. But it wasn’t much use, Otter thought,
since he had to hide it.

What he learned working with his father and uncle in the shipyard he could
use, at least; and he was becoming a good craftsman,  even his father would
admit that.

Losen, a sea-pirate who called himself King of the Inmost Sea, was then the
chief warlord in the city and all the east and south of Havnor. Exacting tribute
from that rich domain, he spent it to increase his soldiery and the fleets he
sent out to take slaves and plunder from other lands. As Otters uncle said, he
kept the shipwrights  busy. They were grateful to have work in a time when
men seeking work found only beggary, and rats ran in the courts of Maharion.
They did an honest job, Otter’s father said, and what the work was used for
was none of their concern.

But the other learning he had been given had made Otter touchy in these
matters, delicate of conscience. The big galley they were building now would
be rowed to war by Losen’s slaves and would bring back slaves as cargo. It
galled him to think of the good ship in that vicious usage. “Why can’t we
build fishing boats, the way we used to?” he asked, and his father said,


“Because the fishermen can’t pay us.”

“Can’t pay us as well as Losen does. But we could live,” Otter argued.

“You think I can turn the King’s order down? You want to see me sent to row
with the slaves in the galley we’re building? Use your head, boy!”

So Otter worked along with them with a clear head and an angry heart. They
were in a trap. What’s the use of a gift of power, he thought, if  not to get 
out
of a trap?

His conscience as a craftsman would not let him fault the carpentry of the

ship in any way; but his conscience as a wizard told him he could put a hex on
her, a curse woven right into her beams and hull. Surely that was using the
secret art to a good end? For harm, yes, but only to harm the harmful. He did
not talk to his teachers about it. If he was doing wrong, it was none of their
fault and they would know nothing about it. He thought about it for a long
time, working out how to do it, making the spell very carefully. It was the
reversal of a finding charm: a losing charm, he called it to himself. The ship
would float, and handle well, and steer, but she would never steer quite true.

It was the best he could do in protest against the misuse of good work and a
good ship. He was pleased with himself. When the ship was launched (and all
seemed well with her, for her fault would not show up until she was out on
the   open sea) he could not keep from his teachers what he had done, the little
circle of old men and midwives, the young hunchback who could speak with
the dead, the blind girl who knew the names of things. He told them his trick,
and the blind girl laughed, but the old people said, “Look out. Take care.

Keep hidden.”

In Losen’s service was a man who called himself Hound, because, as he said,
he had a nose for witchery. His employment was to sniff Losen’s food and
drink and garments and women, anything that might be used by enemy
wizards against him; and also to inspect his warships. A ship is a fragile thing
in      a dangerous element, vulnerable to spells and hexes. As soon as Hound
came aboard the new galley he scented something. “Well, well,” he said,
“who’s this?” He walked to the helm and put his hand on it. “This is clever,”
he said. “But who is it? A newcomer,  I think.” He sniffed appreciatively.
“Very clever,” he said.

They came to the house in Boatwright  Street after dark. They kicked the door
in, and Hound, standing among the armed and armored men, said, “Him. Let
the others be.” And to Otter he said, “Don’t move,” in a low, amicable voice.
He sensed great power in the young man, enough that he was a little afraid of
him. But Otter’s distress was too great and his training too slight for him to
think of using magic to free himself or stop the men’s brutality. He flung


himself  at them and fought them like an animal till they knocked him on the
head. They broke Otter’s father’s jaw and beat his aunt and mother senseless
to teach them not to bring up crafty men. Then they carried Otter away.

Not a door opened in the narrow street. Nobody looked out to see what the
noise was. Not till long after the men were gone did some neighbors creep out
to comfort Otter’s people as best they could. “Oh, it’s a curse, a curse, this
wizardry!” they said.

Hound told his master that they had the hexer in a safe place, and Losen said,
“Who was he working for?”

“He worked in your shipyard, your highness.” Losen liked to be called by
kingly titles.

“Who hired him to hex the ship, fool?”

“It seems it was his own idea, your majesty.”
“Why? What was he going to get out of it?”

Hound shrugged. He didn’t choose to tell Losen that people hated him
disinterestedly.

“He’s crafty, you say. Can you use him?”
“I can try, your highness.”

“Tame him or bury him,” said Losen, and turned to more important matters.

Otter’s humble teachers had taught him pride. They had trained into him a
deep contempt for wizards who worked for such men as Losen, letting fear or
greed pervert magic to evil ends. Nothing, to his mind, could be more
despicable than such a betrayal of their art. So it troubled him that he 
couldn’t
despise Hound.

He had been stowed in a storeroom of one of the old palaces that Losen had
appropriated.  It had no window, its door was cross-grained  oak barred with
iron, and spells had been laid on that door that would have kept a far more
experienced wizard captive. There were men of  great skill and power in
Losen’s pay. Hound did not consider himself  to be one of them. “All I have is
a nose,” he said. He came daily to see that Otter was recovering from his
concussion and dislocated shoulder, and to talk with him. He was, as far as
Otter could see, well-meaning and honest. “If  you won’t work for us they’ll
kill you,” he said. “Losen can’t have fellows like you on the loose. You’d
better hire on while he’ll take you.”

“I can’t.”


Otter stated it as an unfortunate fact, not as a moral assertion. Hound looked
at him with appreciation. Living with the pirate king, he was sick of boasts
and threats, of boasters and threateners.

“What are you strongest in?”

Otter was reluctant to answer. He had to like Hound, but didn’t have to trust
him. “Shape-changing,” he mumbled at last.

“Shape-taking?”

“No. Just tricks. Turn a leaf to a gold piece. Seemingly.”

In those days they had no fixed names for the various kinds and arts of magic,
nor were the connections among those arts clear. There was-as the wise men
of Roke would say later-no science in what they knew. But Hound knew
pretty surely that his prisoner was concealing his talents.

“Can’t change your own form, even seemingly?”
Otter shrugged.

It was hard for him to lie. He thought he was awkward at it because he had no
practice. Hound knew better. He knew that magic itself resists untruth.

Conjuring, sleight of hand, and false commerce with the dead are counterfeits
of magic, glass to the diamond, brass to the gold. They are fraud, and lies
flourish in that soil. But the art of magic, though it may be used for false 
ends,
deals with what is real, and the words it works with are the true words. So
true wizards find it hard to lie about their art. In their heart they know that
their lie, spoken, may change the world.

Hound was sorry for him. “You know, if it was Gelluk questioning  you, he’d
have everything you know out of you just with a word or two, and your wits
with it. I’ve seen what old Whiteface leaves behind when he asks questions.
Listen, can you work with the wind at all?”

Otter hesitated and said, “Yes.”
“D’you have a bag?”

Weatherworkers used to carry a leather sack in which they said they kept the
winds, untying it to let a fair wind loose or to capture a contrary one. Maybe 
it
was only for show, but every weatherworker  had a bag, a great long sack or a
little pouch.

“At home,” Otter said. It wasn’t a lie. He did have a pouch at home. He kept
his fine-work tools and his bubble level in it. And he wasn’t altogether lying
about the wind. Several times he had managed to bring a bit of magewind into
the sail of a boat, though he had no idea how to combat or control a storm, as


a ship’s weatherworker  must do. But he thought he’d rather drown in a gale
than be murdered in this hole.

“But you wouldn’t be willing to use that skill in the King’s service?”

“There is no king in Earthsea,” the young man said, stern and righteous, “In
my master’s service, then,” Hound amended, patient.

“No,” Otter said, and hesitated. He felt he owed this man an explanation.
“See, it’s not so much won’t as can’t. I thought of making plugs in the
planking   of that galley, near the keel-you know what I mean by plugs? They’d
work out as the timbers work when she gets in a heavy sea.” Hound nodded.
“But I couldn’t do it. I’m a shipbuilder. I can’t build a ship to sink. With the
men aboard her. My hands wouldn’t do it. So I did what I could. I made her
go her own way. Not his way.”

Hound smiled. “They haven’t undone what you did yet, either,” he said. “Old
Whiteface was crawling all over her yesterday, growling and muttering.

Ordered the helm replaced.”  He meant Losen’s chief  mage, a pale man from
the North named Gelluk, who was much feared in Havnor.

“That won’t do it.”

“Could you undo the spell you put on her?”

A flicker of  complacency showed in Otters tired, battered young face. “No,”
he said. “I don’t think anybody can.”

“Too bad. You might have used that to bargain with.”
Otter said nothing.

“A nose, now, is a useful thing, a salable thing,” Hound went on. “Not that
I’m looking for competition.  But a finder can always find work, as they say...
You ever been in a mine?”

The guesswork of a wizard is close to knowledge, though he may not know
what it is he knows. The first sign of  Otter’s gift, when he was two or three
years old, was his ability to go straight to anything lost, a dropped nail, a
mislaid tool, as soon as he understood the word for it. And as a boy one of his
dearest pleasures had been to go alone out into the countryside and wander
along  the lanes or over the hills, feeling through the soles of his bare feet 
and
throughout his body the veins of water underground,  the lodes and knots of
ore,         the lay and interfolding of the kinds of rock and earth. It was as 
if he
walked in a great building, seeing its passages and rooms, the descents to airy
caverns, the glimmer of branched silver in the walls; and as he went on, it was
as      if his body became the body of earth, and he knew its arteries and 
organs
and muscles as his own. This power had been a delight to him as a boy. He


had never sought any use for it. It had been his secret.
He did not answer Hound’s question.

“What’s below us?” Hound pointed to the floor, paved with rough slate flags.

Otter was silent a while. Then he said in a low voice, “Clay, and gravel, and
under that the rock that bears garnets. All under this part of the city is that
rock. I don’t know the names.”

“You can learn em.”

“I know how to build boats, how to sail boats.”

“You’ll do better away from the ships, all the fighting and raiding. The King’s
working the old mines at Samory, round the mountain. There you’d be out of
his way. Work for him you must, if you want to stay alive. I’ll see that you’re
sent there. If you’ll go.”

After a little silence Otter said, “Thanks.” And he looked up at Hound, one
brief, questioning,  judging glance.

Hound had taken him, had stood and seen his people beaten senseless, had not
stopped the beating. Yet he spoke as a friend. Why? said Otter’s look. Hound
answered it.

“Crafty men need to stick together,” he said. “Men who have no art at all,
nothing but wealth-they pit us one against the other, for their gain not ours.
We sell em our power. Why do we? If we went our own way together, we’d
do better, maybe.”

Hound meant well in sending the young man to Samory, but he did not
understand  the quality of Otter’s will. Nor did Otter himself. He was too used
to obeying others to see that in fact he had always followed his own bent, and
too young to believe that anything he did could kill him.

He planned, as soon as they took him out of his cell, to use the old Changers
spell of self-transformation and so escape. Surely his life was in danger, and 
it
would be all right to use the spell? Only he couldn’t decide what to turn
himself  into-a bird, or a wisp of smoke, what would be safest? But while he
was thinking about it, Losen’s men, used to wizard’s tricks, drugged his food
and he ceased to think of anything at all. They dumped him into a mule-cart
like a sack of oats. When he showed signs of reviving during the journey, one
of them bashed him on the head, remarking that he wanted to make sure he
got his rest.

When he came to himself, sick and weak from the poison and with an aching
skull, he was in a room with brick walls and bricked-up windows. The door
had no bars and no visible lock. But when he tried to get to his feet he felt


bonds of sorcery holding his body and mind, resilient, clinging, tightening as
he moved. He could stand, but could not take a step towards the door. He
could not even reach his hand out. It was a horrible sensation, as if his
muscles were not his own. He sat down again and tried to hold still. The
spellbonds around his chest kept him from breathing deeply, and his mind felt
stifled too, as if his thoughts were crowded into a space too small for them.

After a long time the door opened and several men came in. He could do
nothing against them as they gagged him and bound his arms behind him.
“Now  you won’t weave charms nor speak spells, young’un,” said a broad,
strong man with a furrowed face, “but you can nod your head well enough,
right? They sent you here as a dowser. If you’re a good dowser you’ll feed
well and sleep easy. Cinnabar, that’s what you’re to nod for. The King’s
wizard says it’s still here somewhere about these old mines. And he wants it.
So  it’s best for us that we find it. Now I’ll walk you out. It’s like I’m the 
water
finder and you’re my wand, see? You lead on. And if you want to go this way
or that way you dip your head, so. And when you know there’s ore underfoot,
you stamp on the place, so. Now that’s the bargain, right? And if you play fair
I will.”

He waited for Otter to nod, but Otter stood motionless.

“Sulk away,” the man said. “If you don’t like this work, there’s always the
roaster.”

The man, whom the others called Licky, led him out into a hot, bright
morning that dazzled his eyes. Leaving his cell he had felt the spellbonds
loosen   and fall away, but there were other spells woven about other buildings
of  the place, especially around a tall stone tower, filling the air with sticky
lines of resistance and repulsion. If he tried to push forward into them his 
face
and belly stung with jabs of agony, so that he looked at his body in horror for
the wound; but there was no wound. Gagged and bound, without his voice
and hands to work magic, he could do nothing against these spells. Licky had
tied one end of a braided leather cord around his neck and held the other end,
following him. He let Otter walk into a couple of the spells, and after that
Otter avoided them. Where they were was plain enough: the dusty pathways
bent to miss them.

Leashed like a dog, he walked along, sullen and shivering with sickness and
rage. He stared around him, seeing the stone tower, stacks of wood by its
wide doorway, rusty wheels and machines by a pit, great heaps of gravel and
clay. Turning his sore head made him dizzy.

“If you’re a dowser, better dowse,” said Licky, coming up alongside him and
looking sidelong into his face. “And if you’re not, you’d better dowse all the


same. That way you’ll stay above ground longer.”

A man came out of the stone tower. He passed them, walking hurriedly with a
queer shambling gait, staring straight ahead. His chin shone and his chest was
wet with spittle leaking from his lips.

“That’s the roaster tower,” said Licky. “Where they cook the cinnabar to get
the metal from it. Roasters die in a year or two. Where to, dowser?”

After a bit Otter nodded left, away from the grey stone tower. They walked on
towards a long, treeless valley, past grass-grown dumps and tailings.

“All under here’s worked out long since” Licky said. And Otter had begun to
be aware of the strange country under his feet: empty shafts and rooms of
dark air in the dark earth, a vertical labyrinth, the deepest pits filled with
unmoving water. “Never was much silver, and the watermetal’s long gone.

Listen, young’un, do you even know what cinnabar is?”
Otter shook his head.

“I’ll show you some. That’s what Gelluk’s after. The ore of watermetal.
Watermetal eats all the other metals, even gold, see.

So he calls it the King. If you find him his King, he’ll treat you well. He’s
often here. Come on, I’ll show you. Dog can’t track till he’s had the scent.”

Licky took him down into the mines to show him the gangues, the kinds of
earth the ore was likely to occur in. A few miners were working at the end of
a long level.

Because they were smaller than men and could move more easily in narrow
places, or because they were at home with the earth, or most likely because it
was the custom, women had always worked the mines of Earthsea. These
miners were free women, not slaves like the workers in the roaster tower.

Gelluk had made him foreman over the miners, Licky said, but he did no
work in the mine; the miners forbade it, earnestly believing it was the worst of
bad luck for a man to pick up a shovel or shore a timber. “Suits me,” Licky
said.

A shock-haired,  bright-eyed woman with a candle bound to her forehead set
down her pick to show Otter a little cinnabar in a bucket, brownish red clots
and crumbs. Shadows leapt across the earth face at which the miners worked.
Old timbers creaked, dirt sifted down. Though the air ran cool through the
darkness, the drifts and levels were so low and narrow the miners had to stoop
and squeeze their way. In places the ceilings had collapsed. Ladders were
shaky. The mine was a terrifying place; yet Otter felt a sense of shelter in 
it.

He was half  sorry to go back up into the burning day.


Licky did not take him into the roaster tower, but back to the barracks. From a
locked room he brought out a small, soft, thick, leather bag that weighed
heavy in his hands. He opened it to show Otter the little pool of dusty
brilliance lying in it. When he closed the bag the metal moved in it, bulging,
pressing, like an animal trying to get free.

“There’s the King,” Licky said, in a tone that might have been reverence or
hatred.

Though not a sorcerer, Licky was a much more formidable man than Hound.
Yet like Hound he was brutal not cruel. He demanded obedience, but nothing
else. Otter had seen slaves and their masters all his life in the shipyards of
Havnor, and knew he was fortunate. At least in daylight, when Licky was his
master.

He could eat only in the cell, where they took his gag off. Bread and onions
were what they gave him, with a slop of rancid oil on the bread. Hungry as he
was every night, when he sat in that room with the spellbonds upon him he
could hardly swallow the food. It tasted of metal, of ash. The nights were long
and terrible, for the spells pressed on him, weighed on him, waked him over
and over terrified, gasping for breath, and never able to think coherently. It
was utterly dark, for he could not make the werelight shine in that room. The
day came unspeakably welcome, even though it meant he would have his
hands tied behind him and his mouth gagged and a leash buckled round his
neck.

Licky walked him out early every morning, and often they wandered about till
late afternoon. Licky was silent and patient.

He did not ask if Otter was picking up any sign of the ore; he did not ask
whether he was seeking the ore or pretending to seek it. Otter himself could
not   have answered the question. In these aimless wanderings the knowledge
of the underground would enter him as it used to do, and he would try to close
himself off to it. “I will not work in the service of evil!” he told himself. 
Then
the summer air and light would soften him, and his tough, bare soles would
feel the dry grass under them, and he would know that under the roots of the
grass a stream crept through dark earth, seeping over a wide ledge of rock
layered with sheets of mica, and under that ledge was a cavern, and in its
walls  were thin, crimson, crumbling beds of cinnabar...  He made no sign. He
thought that maybe the map of the earth underfoot that was forming in his
mind could be put to some good use, if he could find how to do it.

But after ten days or so, Licky said, “Master Gelluk’s coming here. If there’s
no ore for him, he’ll likely find another dowser.”

Otter walked on a mile, brooding; then circled back, leading Licky to a


hillock not far from the far end of the old workings. There he nodded
downward and stamped his foot.

Back in the cell room, when Licky had unleashed him and untied his gag, he
said, “There’s some ore there. You can get to it by running that old tunnel
straight on, maybe twenty feet.”

“A good bit of it?”
Otter shrugged.

“Just enough to keep going on, eh?”
Otter said nothing.

“Suits me,” said Licky.

Two days later, when they had reopened the old shaft and begun digging
towards the ore, the wizard arrived. Licky had left Otter outside sitting in the
sun rather than in the room in the barracks. Otter was grateful to him. He
could not be wholly comfonable with his hands bound and his mouth gagged,
but wind and sunlight were mighty blessings. And he could breathe deep and
doze without dreams of earth stopping his mouth and nostrils, the only dreams
he ever had, nights in the cell.

He was half  asleep, sitting on the ground in the shade by the barracks, the
smell of the logs stacked by the roaster tower bringing him a memory of the
work yards at home, the fragrance of new wood as the plane ran down the
silky oak board. Some noise or movement roused him. He looked up and saw
the wizard standing before him, looming above him.

Gelluk wore fantastic clothes, as many of his kind did in those days. A long
robe of Lorbanery silk, scarlet, embroidered in gold and black with runes and
symbols, and a wide-brimmed,  peak-crowned hat made him seem taller than a
man could be. Otter did not need to see his clothes to know him. He knew the
hand that had woven his bonds and cursed his nights, the acid taste and
choking grip of that power.

“I think I’ve found my little finder,” said Gelluk. His voice was deep and soft,
like the notes of a viol. “Sleeping in the sunshine, like one whose work has
been well done. So you’ve sent them digging for the Red Mother, have you?
Did you know the Red Mother before you came here? Are you a courtier of
the King? Here, now, there’s no need for ropes and knots.” Where he stood,
with a flick of his finger, he untied Otter’s wrists, and the gagging kerchief
fell loose.

“I could teach you how to do that for yourself,” the wizard said, smiling,
watching Otter rub and flex his aching wrists and work his lips that had been


smashed against his teeth for hours. “The Hound told me that you’re a lad of
promise and might go far with a proper guide. If you’d like to visit the Court
of the King, I can take you there. But maybe you don’t know the King I’m
talking of?”

Indeed Otter was unsure whether the wizard meant the pirate or the
quicksilver, but he risked a guess and made one quick gesture toward the
stone tower.

The wizard’s eyes narrowed and his smile broadened.
“Do you know his name?”

“The watermetal,” Otter said.

“So the vulgar call it, or quicksilver, or the water of weight. But those who
serve him call him the King, and the Allking, and the Body of the Moon.” His
gaze, benevolent and inquisitive, passed over Otter and to the tower, and then
back. His face was large and long, whiter than any face Otter had seen, with
bluish eyes. Grey and black hairs curled here and there on his chin and
cheeks.  His calm, open smile showed small teeth, several of them missing.
“Those who have learned to see truly can see him as he is, the lord of all
substances. The root of  power lies in him. Do you know what we call him in
the  secrecy of his palace?”

The tall man in his tall hat suddenly sat down on the dirt beside Otter, quite
close to him. His breath smelled earthy. His light eyes gazed directly into
Otter’s eyes. “Would you like to know? You can know anything you like. I
need have no secrets from you. Nor you from me,” and he laughed, not
threateningly, but with pleasure. He gazed at Otter again, his large, white face
smooth   and thoughtful. “Powers you have, yes, all kinds of little traits and
tricks.   A clever lad. But not too clever; that’s good. Not too clever to 
learn,
like some... I’ll teach you, if you like. Do you like learning? Do you like
knowledge? Would you like to know the name we call the King when he’s all
alone      in his brightness in his courts of stone? His name is Turres. Do you
know that name? It’s a word in the language of the Allking. His own name in
his own language. In our base tongue we would say Semen.” He smiled again
and patted Otter’s hand. “For he is the seed and fructifier. The seed and source
of might and right. You’ll see. You’ll see. Come along! Come along! Let’s go
see the King flying among his subjects, gathering himself  from them!” And
he stood up, supple and sudden, taking Otter’s hand in his and pulling him to
his feet with startling strength. He was laughing with excitement.

Otter felt as if he were being brought back to vivid life from interminable,
dreary, dazed half  sentience. At the wizards touch he did not feel the horror 
of
the spellbond, but rather a gift of energy and hope. He told himself  not to 
trust


this man, but he longed to trust him, to learn from him. Gelluk was powerful,
masterful, strange, yet he had set him free. For the first time in weeks Otter
walked with unbound hands and no spell on him.

“This way, this way,” Gelluk murmured. “No harm will come to you.” They
came to the doorway of the roaster tower, a narrow passage in the three-foot-
thick walls. He took Otter’s arm, for the young man hesitated.

Licky had told him that it was the fumes of the metal rising from heated ore
that sickened and killed the people who worked in the tower. Otter had never
entered it nor seen Licky enter it. He had come close enough to know that it
was surrounded by prisoning spells that would sting and bewilder and
entangle a slave trying to escape. Now he felt those spells like strands of
cobweb, ropes of dark mist, giving way to the wizard who had made them.

“Breathe, breathe, breathe,” Gelluk said, laughing, and Otter tried not to hold
his breath as they entered the tower.

The roasting pit took up the center of a huge domed chamber. Hurrying,
sticklike figures black against the blaze shoveled and reshoveled ore onto logs
kept  in a roaring blaze by great bellows, while others brought fresh logs and
worked the bellows sleeves. From the apex of the dome a spiral of chambers
rose  up into the tower through smoke and fumes. In those chambers, Licky
had told him, the vapor of the quicksilver was trapped and condensed,
reheated and recondensed, till in the topmost vault the pure metal ran down
into        a stone trough or bowl-only a drop or two a day, he said, from the 
low-
grade ores they were roasting now.

“Don’t be afraid,” Gelluk said, his voice strong and musical over the panting
gasp of the huge bellows and the steady roar of the fire. “Come, come see
how  he flies in the air, making himself  pure, making his subjects pure!” He
drew Otter to the edge of the roasting pit. His eyes shone in the flare and
dazzle  of the flames. “Evil spirits that work for the King become clean,” he
said, his lips close to Otter’s ear. “As they slaver, the dross and stains flow 
out
of them. Illness and impurities fester and run free from their sores. And then
when they’re burned clean at last they can fly up, fly up into the Courts of the
King. Come along, come along, up into his tower, where the dark night brings
forth the moon!”

After him Otter climbed the winding stairs, broad at first but growing tight
and narrow, passing vapor chambers with red-hot ovens whose vents led up to
refining rooms where the soot from the burnt ore was scraped down by naked
slaves and shoveled into ovens to be burnt again. They came to the topmost
room. Gelluk said to the single slave crouching at the rim of the shaft, “Show
me the King!”


The slave, short and thin, hairless, with running sores on his hands and arms,
uncapped a stone cup by the rim of the condensing shaft. Gelluk peered in,
eager as a child. “So tiny,” he murmured. “So young. The tiny Prince, the
baby Lord, Lord Turres. Seed of the world! Soul-jewel!”

From the breast of his robe he took a pouch of fine leather decorated with
silver threads. With a delicate horn spoon tied to the pouch he lifted the few
drops of quicksilver from the cup and placed them in it, then retied the thong.

The slave stood by, motionless. All the people who worked in the heat and
fumes of the roaster tower were naked or wore only breechclout and
moccasins. Otter glanced again at the slave, thinking by his height he was a
child,    and then saw the small breasts. It was a woman. She was bald. Her
joints were swollen knobs in her bone-thin limbs. She looked up once at
Otter, moving her eyes only. She spat into the fire, wiped her sore mouth with
her hand, and stood motionless again.

“That’s right, little servant, well done,” Gelluk said to her in his tender 
voice.
“Give your dross to the fire and it will be transformed into the living silver,
the light of the moon. Is it not a wonderful thing,” he went on, drawing Otter
away and back down the spiral stair, “how from what is most base comes
what is most noble? That is a great principle of the art! From the vile Red
Mother is born the Allking. From the spittle of a dying slave is made the
silver Seed of Power.”

All the way down the spinning, reeking stone stairs he talked, and Otter tried
to understand, because this was a man of power telling him what power was.

But when they came out into the daylight again his head kept on spinning in
the dark, and after a few steps he doubled over and vomited on the ground.

Gelluk watched him with his inquisitive, affectionate look, and when Otter
stood up, wincing and gasping, the wizard asked gently, “Are you afraid of
the King?”

Otter nodded.

“If you share his power he won’t harm you. To fear a power, to fight a power,
is very dangerous.  To love power and to share it is the royal way. Look.

Watch what I do.” Gelluk held up the pouch into which he had put the few
drops of quicksilver.  His eye always on Otter’s eye, he unsealed the pouch,
lifted it to his lips, and drank its contents. He opened his smiling mouth so
that Otter could see the silver drops pooling on his tongue before he
swallowed.

“Now the King is in my body, the noble guest of my house. He won’t make
me slaver and vomit or cause sores on my body; no, for I don’t fear him, but


invite him, and so he enters into my veins and arteries. No harm comes to me.
My blood runs silver. I see things unknown to other men. I share the secrets of
the King. And when he leaves me, he hides in the place of ordure, in foulness
itself, and yet again in the vile place he waits for me to come and take him up
and cleanse him as he cleansed me, so that each time we grow purer

together.” The wizard took Otter’s arm and walked along with him. He said,
smiling and confidential, “I am one who shits moonlight. You will not know
another such. And more than that, more than that, the King enters into my
seed. He is my semen. I am Turres and he is me...”

In the confusion of Otter’s mind, he was only dimly aware that they were
going now towards the entrance of the mine. They went underground. The
passages of the mine were a dark maze like the wizard’s words. Otter
stumbled    on, trying to understand. He saw the slave in the tower, the woman
who had looked at him. He saw her eyes.

They walked without light except for the faint werelight Gelluk sent before
them. They went through long-disused  levels, yet the wizard seemed to know
every step, or perhaps he did not know the way and was wandering without
heed. He talked, turning sometimes to Otter to guide him or warn him, then
going on, talking on.

They came to where the miners were extending the old tunnel. There the
wizard spoke with Licky in the flare of candles among jagged shadows. He
touched the earth of the tunnel’s end, took clods of earth in his hands, rolled
the dirt in his palms, kneading, testing, tasting it. For that time he was 
silent,
and Otter watched him with staring intensity, still trying to understand.

Licky came back to the barracks with them. Gelluk bade Otter goodnight in
his soft voice. Licky shut him as usual into the brick-walled room, giving him
a loaf of bread, an onion, a jug of water.

Otter crouched as always in the uneasy oppression of the spellbond. He drank
thirstily. The sharp earthy taste of the onion was good, and he ate it all.

As the dim light that came into the room from chinks in the mortar of the
bricked-up window died away, instead of sinking into the blank misery of all
his   nights in that room, he stayed awake, and grew more awake. The excited
turmoil of his mind all the time he had been with Gelluk slowly quieted. From
it something rose, coming close, coming clear, the image he had seen down in
the mine, shadowy yet distinct: the slave in the high vault of the tower, that
woman with empty breasts and festered eyes, who spat the spittle that ran
from     her poisoned mouth, and wiped her mouth, and stood waiting to die. She
had looked at him.

He saw her now more clearly than he had seen her in the tower. He saw her


more clearly than he had ever seen anyone. He saw the thin arms, the swollen
joints of elbow and wrist, the childish nape of her neck. It was as if she was
with him in the room. It was as if she was in him, as if she was him. She
looked at him. He saw her look at him. He saw himself  through her eyes.

He saw the lines of the spells that held him, heavy cords of darkness, a
tangled maze of lines all about him. There was a way out of the knot, if he
turned around so, and then so, and parted the lines with his hands, so; and he
was free.

He could not see the woman any more. He was alone in the room, standing
free.

All the thoughts he had not been able to think for days and weeks were racing
through his head, a storm of ideas and feelings, a passion of rage, vengeance,
pity, pride.

At first he was overwhelmed with fierce fantasies of  power and revenge: he
would free the slaves, he would spellbind Gelluk and hurl him into the
refining fire, he would bind him and blind him and leave him to breathe the
fumes of  quicksilver in that highest vault till he died... But when his 
thoughts
settled down and began to run clearer, he knew that he could not defeat a
wizard of  great craft and power, even if that wizard was mad. If he had any
hope it was to play on his madness, and lead the wizard to defeat himself.

He pondered. All the time he was with Gelluk, he had tried to learn from him,
tried to understand what the wizard was telling him. Yet he was certain, now,
that Gelluk’s ideas, the teaching he so eagerly imparted, had nothing to do
with his power or with any true power. Mining and refining were indeed great
crafts with their own mysteries and masteries, but Gelluk seemed to know
nothing of those arts. His talk of the Allking and the Red Mother was mere
words. And not the right words. But how did Otter know that?

In all his flood of talk the only word Gelluk had spoken in the Old Tongue,
the language of which wizards’ spells were made, was the word turres. He had
said it meant semen. Otter’s own gift of magery had recognized that meaning
as the true one. Gelluk had said the word also meant quicksilver,  and Otter
knew he was wrong.

His humble teachers had taught him all the words they knew of the Language
of the Making. Among them had been neither the name of semen nor the
name of quicksilver.  But his lips parted, his tongue moved. “Ayezur” he said.

His voice was the voice of the slave in the stone tower. It was she who knew
the true name of quicksilver and spoke it through him.

Then for a while he held still, body and mind, beginning to understand for the


first time where his power lay.

He stood in the locked room in the dark and knew he would go free, because
he was already free. A storm of  praise ran through him.

After a while, deliberately, he re-entered the trap of spell-bonds, went back to
his old place, sat down on the pallet, and went on thinking. The prisoning
spell was still there, yet it had no power over him now. He could walk into it
and out of it as if it were mere lines painted on the floor. Gratitude for this
freedom beat in him as steady as his heartbeat.

He thought what he must do, and how he must do it. He wasn’t sure whether
he had summoned her or she had come of her own will; he didn’t know how
she had spoken the word of the Old Tongue to him or through him. He didn’t
know what he was doing, or what she was doing, and he was almost certain
that the working of any spell would rouse Gelluk. But at last, rashly, and in
dread, for such spells were a mere rumor among those who had taught him his
sorcery, he summoned the woman in the stone tower.

He brought her into his mind and saw her as he had seen her, there, in that
room, and called out to her; and she came.

Her apparition stood again just outside the spiderweb cords of the spell,
gazing at him, and seeing him, for a soft, bluish, sourceless light filled the
room. Her sore, raw lips quivered but she did not speak.

He spoke, giving her his true name: “I am Medra.”
“I am Anieb,” she whispered.

“How can we get free?”
“His name.”

“Even if I knew it... When I’m with him I can’t speak.”
“If I was with you, I could use it.”

“I can’t call you.”

“But I can come,” she said.

She looked round, and he looked up. Both knew that Gelluk had sensed
something, had wakened. Otter felt the bonds close and tighten, and the old
shadow fall.

“I will come, Medra,” she said. She held out her thin hand in a fist, then
opened it palm up as if offering him something. Then she was gone.

The light went with her. He was alone in the dark. The cold grip of the spells
took him by the throat and choked him, bound his hands, pressed on his


lungs. He crouched, gasping. He could not think; he could not remember.
“Stay with me,” he said, and did not know who he spoke to. He was
frightened, and did not know what he was frightened of. The wizard, the
power,     the spell...  It was all darkness. But in his body, not in his mind,
burned     a knowledge he could not name any more, a certainty that was like a
tiny lamp held in his hands in a maze of caverns underground.  He kept his
eyes on that seed of light.

Weary, evil dreams of suffocation came to him, but took no hold on him. He
breathed deep. He slept at last. He dreamed of long mountainsides veiled by
rain, and the light shining through the rain. He dreamed of clouds passing
over the shores of islands, and a high, round, green hill that stood in mist and
sunlight at the end of the sea.

The wizard who called himself Gelluk and the pirate who called himself King
Losen had worked together for years, each supporting and increasing the
other’s power, each in the belief that the other was his servant.

Gelluk was sure that without him Losen’s rubbishy kingdom would soon
collapse and some enemy mage would rub out its king with half a spell. But
he     let Losen act the master. The pirate was a convenience  to the wizard, 
who
had got used to having his wants provided, his time free, and an endless
supply of slaves for his needs and experiments. It was easy to keep up the
protections he had laid on Losen’s person and expeditions  and forays, the
prisoning spells he had laid on the places slaves worked or treasures were
kept. Making those spells had been a different matter, a long hard work. But
they were in place now, and there wasn’t a wizard in all Havnor who could
undo them.

Gelluk had never met a man he feared. A few wizards had crossed his path
strong enough to make him wary of them, but he had never known one with
skill and power equal to his own.

Of late, entering always deeper into the mysteries of a certain lore-book
brought back from the Isle of Way by one of Losen’s raiders, Gelluk had
become indifferent to most of the arts he had learned or had discovered for
himself. The book convinced him that all of them were only shadows or hints
of      a greater mastery. As one true element controlled all substances,  one 
true
knowledge contained all others. Approaching  ever closer to that mastery, he
understood that the crafts of wizards were as crude and false as Losen’s title
and     rule. When he was one with the true element, he would be the one true
king. Alone among men he would speak the words of making and unmaking.
He would have dragons for his dogs.

In the young dowser he recognized a power, untaught and inept, which he


could use. He needed much more quicksilver than he had, therefore he needed
a finder. Finding was a base skill. Gelluk had never practiced it, but he could
see that the young fellow had the gift. He would do well to learn the boy’s
true name so that he could be sure of controlling  him. He sighed at the
thought  of the time he must waste teaching the boy what he was good for.

And after that the ore must still be dug out of the earth and the metal refined.
As always, Gelluk’s mind leapt across obstacles and delays to the wonderful
mysteries at the end of them.

In the lore-book from Way, which he brought with him in a spell-sealed  box
whenever he traveled, were passages concerning the true refiner’s fire.

Having long studied these, Gelluk knew that once he had enough of the pure
metal, the next stage was to refine it yet further into the Body of the Moon.
He   had understood the disguised language of the book to mean that in order to
purify pure quicksilver, the fire must be built not of mere wood but of human

corpses. Rereading and pondering the words this night in his room in the
barracks, he discerned another possible meaning in them. There was always
another meaning in the words of this lore. Perhaps the book was saying that
there must be sacrifice not only of base flesh but also of inferior spirit. The
great fire in the tower should burn not dead bodies but living ones. Living and
conscious. Purity from foulness: bliss from pain. It was all part of the great
principle, perfectly clear once seen. He was sure he was right, had at last
understood the technique. But he must not hurry, he must be patient, must
make   certain. He turned to another passage and compared the two, and
brooded over the book late into the night. Once for a moment something drew
his mind away, some invasion of the outskirts of his awareness; the boy was
trying some trick or other. Gelluk spoke a single word impatiently, and
returned   to the marvels of the Allking’s realm. He never noticed that his
prisoner’s dreams had escaped him.

Next day he had Licky send him the boy. He looked forward to seeing him, to
being kind to him, teaching him, petting him a bit as he had done yesterday.

He sat down with him in the sun. Gelluk was fond of children and animals.
He liked all beautiful things. It was pleasant to have a young creature about.
Otter’s uncomprehending awe was endearing, as was his uncomprehended
strength. Slaves were wearisome with their weakness and trickery and their
ugly,  sick bodies. Of course Otter was his slave, but the boy need not know it.
They could be teacher and prentice. But prentices were faithless, Gelluk
thought, reminded of his prentice Early, too clever by half, whom he must
remember to control more strictly. Father and son, that’s what he and Otter
could      be. He would have the boy call him Father. He recalled that he had
intended to find out his true name. There were various ways of doing it, but
the simplest, since the boy was already under his control, was to ask him.


“What is your name?” he said, watching Otter intently.

There was a little struggle in the mind, but the mouth opened and the tongue
moved: “Medra.”

“Very good, very good, Medra,” said the wizard. “You may call me Father.”

“You must find the Red Mother,” he said, the day after that. They were sitting
side by side again outside the barracks. The autumn sun was warm. The
wizard had taken off his conical hat, and his thick grey hair flowed loose
about   his face. “I know you found that little patch for them to dig, but 
there’s
no more in that than a few drops. It’s scarcely worth burning for so little. If
you are to help me, and if I am to teach you, you must try a little harder. I
think you know how.” He smiled at Otter. “Don’t you?”

Otter nodded.

He was still shaken, appalled, by the ease with which Gelluk had forced him
to say his name, which gave the wizard immediate and ultimate power over
him. Now he had no hope of  resisting Gelluk in any way. That night he had
been in utter despair. But then Anieb had come into his mind: come of her
own will, by her own means. He could not summon her, could not even think
of her, and would not have dared to do so, since Gelluk knew his name. But
she came, even when he was with the wizard, not in apparition but as a
presence in his mind.

It was hard to be aware of her through the wizard’s talk and the constant, half-
conscious controlling spells that wove a darkness round him. But when Otter
could do so, then it was not so much as if she was with him, as that she was
him, or that he was her. He saw through her eyes. Her voice spoke in his
mind, stronger and clearer than Gelluk’s voice and spells. Through her eyes
and mind he could see, and think. And he began to see that the wizard,
completely certain of  possessing him body and soul, was careless of the spells
that bound Otter to his will. A bond is a connection.  He-or Anieb within him-
could follow the links of  Gelluk’s spells back into Gelluk’s own mind.

Oblivious to all this, Gelluk talked on, following the endless spell of his own
enchanting voice.

“You must find the true womb, the bellybag of the Earth, that holds the pure
moonseed. Did you know that the Moon is the Earth’s father? Yes, yes; and he
lay with her, as is the father’s right. He quickened her base clay with the true
seed. But she will not give birth to the King. She is strong in her fear and
willful in her vileness. She holds him back and hides him deep, fearing to

give birth to her master. That is why, to give him birth, she must be burned
alive.”


Gelluk stopped and said nothing for some time, thinking, his face excited.
Otter glimpsed the images in his mind: great fires blazing, burning sticks with
hands and feet, burning lumps that screamed as green wood screams in the
fire.

“Yes,” Gelluk said, his deep voice soft and dreamy, “she must be burned
alive. And then, only then, he will spring forth, shining!

Oh, it’s time, and past time. We must deliver the King. We must find the great
lode. It is here; there is no doubt of that:  ‘The womb of the Mother lies under
Samory.””

Again he paused. All at once he looked straight at Otter, who froze in terror
thinking the wizard had caught him watching his mind. Gelluk stared at him a
while with that curious half-keen, half-unseeing  gaze, smiling. “Little
Medra!”   he said, as if just discovering  he was there. He patted Otter’s
shoulder.      “I know you have the gift of finding what’s hidden. Quite a great
gift,    were it suitably trained. Have no fear, my son. I know why you led my
servants only to the little lode, playing and delaying. But now that I’ve come,
you serve me, and have nothing to be afraid of. And there’s no use trying to
conceal anything from me, is there? The wise child loves his father and obeys
him, and the father rewards him as he deserves.” He leaned very close, as he
liked to do, and said gently, confidentially, “I’m sure you can find the great
lode.”

“I know where it is,” Anieb said.

Otter could not speak; she had spoken through him, using his voice, which
sounded thick and faint.

Very few people ever spoke to Gelluk unless he compelled them to. The spells
by which he silenced, weakened,  and controlled all who approached him were
so habitual to him that he gave them no thought. He was used to being
listened to, not to listening.  Serene in his strength and obsessed with his 
ideas,
he  had no thought beyond them. He was not aware of Otter at all except as a
part of his plans, an extension of himself. “Yes, yes, you will,” he said, and
smiled again.

But Otter was intensely aware of Gelluk, both physically and as a presence of
immense controlling  power; and it seemed to him that Anieb’s speaking had
taken away that much of Gelluk’s power over him, gaining him a place to
stand, a foothold. Even with Gelluk so close to him, fearfully close, he
managed to speak.

“I will take you there,” he said, stiffly, laboriously.

Gelluk was used to hearing people say the words he had put in their mouths,


if they said anything at all. These were words he wanted but had not expected
to hear. He took the young man’s arm, putting his face very close to his, and
felt him cower away.

“How clever you are,” he said. “Have you found better ore than that patch
you found first? Worth the digging and the roasting?”

“It is the lode,” the young man said.

The slow stiff words carried great weight.

“The great lode?” Gelluk looked straight at him, their faces not a hand’s
breadth apan. The light in his bluish eyes was like the soft, crazy shift of
quicksilver. “The womb?”

“Only the Master can go there.”
“What Master?”

“The Master of the House. The King.”

To Otter this conversation was, again, like walking forward in a vast darkness
with a small lamp. Anieb’s understanding was that lamp. Each step revealed
the next step he must take, but he could never see the place where he was. He
did not know what was coming next, and did not understand what he saw. But
he saw it, and went forward, word by word.

“How do you know of that House?”
“I saw it.”

“Where? Near here?”
Otter nodded.

“Is it in the earth?”

Tell him what he sees, Anieb whispered in Otter’s mind, and he spoke: “A
stream runs through darkness over a glittering roof. Under the roof is the
House  of the King. The roof  stands high above the floor, on high pillars. The
floor is red. All the pillars are red. On them are shining runes.”

Gelluk caught his breath. Presently he said, very softly, “Can you read the
runes?”

“I cannot read them.” Otter’s voice was toneless. “I cannot go there. No one
can enter there in the body but only the King. Only he can read what is
written.”

Gelluk’s white face had gone whiter; his jaw trembled a little. He stood up,
suddenly, as he always did. “Take me there,” he said, trying to control


himself, but so violently compelling Otter to get up and walk that the young
man lurched to his feet and stumbled several steps, almost falling. Then he
walked forward, stiff and awkward, trying not to resist the coercive,
passionate will that hurried his steps.

Gelluk pressed close beside him, often taking his arm. “This way,” he said
several times. “Yes, yes! This is the way.” Yet he was following Otter. His
touch and his spells pushed him, rushed him, but in the direction Otter chose
to go.

They walked past the roaster tower, past the old shaft and the new one, on
into the long valley where Otter had taken Licky the first day he was there. It
was late autumn now. The shrubs and scrubby grass that had been green that
day were dun and dry, and the wind rattled the last leaves on the bushes. To
their left a little stream ran low among willow thickets. Mild sunlight and
long shadows streaked the hillsides.

Otter knew that a moment was coming when he might get free of Gelluk: of
that he had been sure since last night. He knew also that in that same moment
he might defeat Gelluk, disempower him, if the wizard, driven by his visions,
forgot to guard himself-and if Otter could learn his name.

The wizard’s spells still bound their minds together. Otter pressed rashly
forward into Gelluk’s mind, seeking his true name. But he did not know
where      to look or how to look. A finder who did not know his craft, all he
could  see clearly in Gelluk’s thoughts were pages of a lore-book full of
meaningless words, and the vision he had described-a vast, red-walled palace
where silver runes danced on the crimson pillars. But Otter could not read the
book or the runes. He had never learned to read.

All this time he and Gelluk were going on farther from the tower, away from
Anieb, whose presence sometimes weakened and faded. Otter dared not try to
summon her.

Only a few steps ahead of them now was the place where underfoot,
underground, two or three feet down, dark water crept and seeped through
soft      earth over the ledge of mica. Under that opened the hollow cavern and
the lode of  cinnabar.

Gelluk was almost wholly absorbed in his own vision, but since Otter’s mind
and his were connected, he saw something of what Otter saw. He stopped,
gripping Otter’s arm. His hand shook with eagerness.

Otter pointed at the low slope that rose before them. “The King’s House is
there,” he said. Gelluk’s attention turned entirely away from him then, fixed
on   the hillside and the vision he saw within it. Then Otter could call to 
Anieb.


At once she came into his mind and being, and was there with him.

Gelluk was standing still, but his shaking hands were clenched, his whole tall
body twitching and trembling, like a hound that wants to chase but cannot
find the scent. He was at a loss. There was the hillside with its grass and
bushes in the last of the sunlight, but there was no entrance. Grass growing
out of gravelly dirt; the seamless earth.

Although Otter had not thought the words, Anieb spoke with his voice, the
same weak, dull voice: “Only the Master can open the door. Only the King
has the key.”

“The key,” Gelluk said.

Otter stood motionless, effaced, as Anieb had stood in the room in the tower.
“The key,” Gelluk repeated, urgent.

“The key is the King’s name.”

That was a leap in the darkness. Which of them had said it?

Gelluk stood tense and trembling, still at a loss. “Turres,” he said, after a 
time,
almost in a whisper.

The wind blew in the dry grass.

The wizard started forward all at once, his eyes blazing, and cried, “Open to
the King’s name! I am Tinaral!” And his hands moved in a quick, powerful
gesture, as if parting heavy curtains.

The hillside in front of him trembled, writhed, and opened. A gash in it
deepened, widened. Water sprang up out of it and ran across the wizard’s feet.

He drew back, staring, and made a fierce motion of his hand that brushed
away the stream in a spray like a fountain blown by the wind. The gash in the
earth grew deeper, revealing the ledge of mica. With a sharp rending crack the
glittering stone split apart. Under it was darkness.

The wizard stepped forward. “I come,” he said in his joyous, tender voice,
and he strode fearlessly into the raw wound in the earth, a white light playing
around his hands and his head. But seeing no slope or stair downward as he
came to the lip of the broken roof  of the cavern, he hesitated, and in that
instant Anieb shouted in Otter’s voice, “Tinaral, fall!”

Staggering wildly the wizard tried to turn, lost his footing on the crumbling
edge, and plunged down into the dark, his scarlet cloak billowing up, the
werelight round him like a falling star.

“Close!” Otter cried, dropping to his knees, his hands on the earth, on the raw


lips of the crevasse. “Close, Mother! Be healed, be whole!” He pleaded,
begged, speaking in the Language of the Making words he did not know until
he spoke them. “Mother, be whole!” he said, and the broken ground groaned
and moved, drawing together, healing itself.

A reddish seam remained, a scar through the dirt and gravel and uprooted
grass.

The wind rattled the dry leaves on the scrub-oak bushes. The sun was behind
the hill, and clouds were coming over in a low, grey mass.

Otter crouched there at the foot of the hillslope, alone.

The clouds darkened. Rain passed through the little valley, falling on the dirt
and the grass. Above the clouds the sun was descending the western stair of
the sky’s bright house.

Otter sat up at last. He was wet, cold, bewildered. Why was he here?

He had lost something and had to find it. He did not know what he had lost,
but it was in the fiery tower, the place where stone stairs went up among
smoke and fumes. He had to go there. He got to his feet and shuffled, lame
and unsteady, back down the valley.

He had no thought of hiding or protecting himself. Luckily for him there were
no guards about; there were few guards, and they were not on the alert, since
the wizard’s spells had kept the prison shut. The spells were gone, but the
people in the tower did not know it, working on under the greater spell of
hopelessness.

Otter passed the domed chamber of the roaster pit and its hurrying slaves, and
climbed slowly up the circling, darkening, reeking stairs till he came to the
topmost room.

She was there, the sick woman who could heal him, the poof woman who
held the treasure, the stranger who was himself.

He stood silent in the doorway. She sat on the stone floor near the crucible,
her thin body grayish and dark like the stones. Her chin and breasts were
shiny with the spittle that ran from her mouth. He thought of the spring of
water that had run from the broken earth.

“Medra,” she said. Her sore mouth could not speak clearly. He knelt down
and took her hands, looking into her face.

“Anieb,” he whispered,  “conic with me”
“I want to go home,” she said.

He helped her stand. He made no spell to protect or hide them. His strength


had been used up. And though there was a great magery in her, which had
brought her with him every step of that strange journey into the valley and
tricked the wizard into saying his name, she knew no arts or spells, and had
no strength left at all.

Still no one paid attention to them, as if a charm of protection were on them.
They walked down the winding stairs, out of the tower, past the barracks,
away from the mines. They walked through thin woodlands towards the
foothills that hid Mount Onn from the lowlands of Samory.

Anieb kept a better pace than seemed possible in a woman so famished and
destroyed, walking almost naked in the chill of the rain. All her will was
aimed on walking forward;  she had nothing else in her mind, not him, not
anything. But she was there bodily with him, and he felt her presence as
keenly and strangely as when she had come to his summoning. The rain ran
down her naked head and body. He made her stop to put on his shirt. He was
ashamed of it, for it was filthy, he having worn it all these weeks. She let him
pull it over her head and then walked right on. She could not go quickly, but
she went steadily, her eyes fixed on the faint cart track they followed, till 
the
night came early under the rain clouds, and they could not see where to set
their feet.

“Make the light,” she said. Her voice was a whimper, plaintive. “Can’t you
make the light?”

“I don’t know,” he said, but he tried to bring the werelight round them, and
after a while the ground glimmered faintly before their feet.

“We should find shelter and rest,” he said.

“I can’t stop,” she said, and started to walk again.
“You can’t walk all night.”

“If I lie down I won’t get up. I want to see the Mountain.”

Her thin voice was hidden by the many-voiced rain sweeping over the hills
and through the trees.

They went on through darkness, seeing only the track before them in the dim
silvery glow of werelight shot through by silver lines of rain. When she
stumbled he caught her arm. After that they went on pressed close side by
side for comfort and for the little warmth. They walked slower, and yet
slower, but they walked on. There was no sound but the sound of the rain
falling from the black sky, and the little kissing squelch of their sodden feet 
in
the mud and wet grass of the track.

“Look,” she said, halting. “Medra, look.”


He had been walking almost asleep. The pallor of the werelight had faded,
drowned in a fainter, vaster clarity. Sky and earth were all one grey, but 
before
them and above them, very high, over a drift of cloud, the long ridge of the
mountain glimmered red.

“There,” Anieb said. She pointed at the mountain and smiled. She looked at
her companion, then slowly down at the ground. She sank down kneeling. He
knelt with her, tried to support her, but she slid down in his arms. He tried to
keep her head at least from the mud of the track. Her limbs and face twitched,
her teeth chattered. He held her close against him, trying to warm her.

“The women,” she whispered, “the hand. Ask them. In the village. I did see
the Mountain.”

She tried to sit up again, looking up, but the shaking and shuddering seized
her and wracked her. She began to gasp for breath. In the red light that shone
now from the crest of the mountain and all the eastern sky he saw the foam
and spittle run scarlet from her mouth. Sometimes she clutched at him, but
she did not speak again. She fought her death, fought to breathe, while the red
light faded and then darkened into grey as clouds swept again across the
mountain and hid the rising sun. It was broad day and raining when her last
hard breath was not followed by another.

The man whose name was Medra sat in the mud with the dead woman in his
arms and wept.

A carter walking at his mule’s head with a load of oakwood came upon them
and took them both to Woodedge. He could not make the young man let go of
the dead woman. Weak and shaky as he was, he would not set his burden
down on the load, but clambered into the cart holding her, and held her all the
miles to Woodedge. All he said was “She saved me,” and the carter asked no
questions.

“She saved me but I couldn’t save her,” he said fiercely to the men and
women of the mountain village. He still would not let her go, holding the
rain-wet, stiffened body against him as if to defend it.

Very slowly they made him understand that one of the women was Anieb’s
mother, and that he should give Anieb to her to hold. He did so at last,
watching   to see if she was gentle with his friend and would protect her. Then
he followed another woman meekly enough. He put on dry clothing she gave
him to put on, and ate a little food she gave him to eat, and lay down on the
pallet she led him to, and sobbed in weariness, and slept.

In a day or two some of Licky’s men came asking if anyone had seen or heard
tell of the great wizard Gelluk and a young finder-both disappeared without a


trace, they said, as if the earth had swallowed them. Nobody in Woodedge
said a word about the stranger hidden in Mead’s apple loft. They kept him
safe. Maybe that is why the people there now call their village not Woodedge,
as it used to be, but Otterhide.

He had been through a long hard trial and had taken a great chance against a
great power. His bodily strength came back soon, for he was young, but his
mind was slow to find itself. He had lost something, lost it forever, lost it as
he found it.

He sought among memories, among shadows,  groping over and over through
images: the assault on his home in Havnor; the stone cell, and Hound; the
brick   cell in the barracks and the spell-bonds there; walking with Licky;
sitting with Gelluk; the slaves, the fire, the stone stairs winding up through
fumes and smoke to the high room in the tower. He had to regain it all, to go
through it all, searching. Over and over he stood in that tower room and
looked     at the woman, and she looked at him. Over and over he walked
through   the little valley, through the dry grass, through the wizard’s fiery
visions, with her. Over and over he saw the wizard fall, saw the earth close.

He saw the red ridge of the mountain in the dawn. Anieb died while he held
her, her ruined face against his arm. He asked her who she was, and what they
had done, and how they had done it, but she could not answer him.

Her mother Ayo and her mothers sister Mead were wise women. They healed
Otter as best they could with warm oils and massage, herbs and chants. They
talked to him and listened when he talked. Neither of them had any doubt but
that he was a man of great power. He denied this. “I could have done nothing
without your daughter,” he said.

“What did she do?” Ayo asked, softly.

He told her, as well as he could. “We were strangers. Yet she gave me her
name,” he said. “And I gave her mine.” He spoke haltingly, with long pauses.
“It was I that walked with the wizard, compelled by him, but she was with
me, and she was free. And so together we could turn his power against him,
so that he destroyed himself.” He thought tor a long time, and said, “She gave
me her power.”

“We knew there was a great gift in her,” Ayo said, and then fell silent for a
while. “We didn’t know how to teach her. There are no teachers left on the
mountain. King Losen’s wizards destroy the sorcerers and witches. There’s no
one      to turn to.”

“Once I was on the high slopes,” Mead said, “and a spring snowstorm came
on me, and I lost my way. She came there. She came to me, not in the body,
and guided me to the track. She was only twelve then.”


“She walked with the dead, sometimes,” Ayo said very low. “In the forest,
down towards Faliern. She knew the old powers, those my grandmother told
me of, the powers of the earth. They were strong there, she said.”

“But she was only a girl like the others, too,” Mead said, and hid her face. “A
good girl,” she whispered.

After a while Ayo said, “She went down to Firn with some of the young folk.
To buy fleece from the shepherds there. A year ago last spring. That wizard
they spoke of came there, casting spells. Taking slaves.”

Then they were all silent.

Ayo and Mead were much alike, and Otter saw in them what Anieb might
have been: a short, slight, quick woman, with a round face and clear eyes, and
a mass of  dark hair, not straight like most people’s hair but curly, frizzy. 
Many
people in the west of  Havnor had hair like that.

But Anieb had been bald, like all the slaves in the roaster tower.

Her use-name had been Flag, the blue iris of the springs. Her mother and aunt
called her Flag when they spoke of her.

“Whatever I am, whatever I can do, it’s not enough,” he said.

“It’s never enough,” Mead said. “And what can anyone do alone?”

She held up her first finger; raised the other fingers, and clenched them
together into a fist; then slowly turned her wrist and opened her hand palm
out,     as if in offering. He had seen Anieb make that gesture. It was not a 
spell,
he thought, watching intently, but a sign. Ayo was watching him.

“It is a secret,” she said.

“Can I know the secret?” he asked after a while.

“You already know it. You gave it to Flag. She gave it to you. Trust.”
“Trust,” the young man said. “Yes. But against- Against them?- Gelluk’s

gone. Maybe Losen will fall now. Will it make any difference? Will the slaves
go free? Will beggars eat? Will justice be done? I think there’s an evil in us, 
in
humankind. Trust denies it. Leaps across it. Leaps the chasm. But it’s there.

And everything we do finally serves evil, because that’s what we are. breed
and cruelty. I look at the world, at the forests and the mountain here, the sky,
and it’s all right, as it should be. But we aren’t. People aren’t. We’re wrong.
We do wrong. No animal does wrong. How could they? But we can, and we
do. And we never stop.”

They listened to him, not agreeing, not denying, but accepting his despair. His
words went into their listening silence, and rested there for days, and came


back to him changed.

“We can’t do anything without each other,” he said. “But it’s the greedy ones,
the cruel ones who hold together and strengthen  each other. And those who
won’t join them stand each alone.” The image of Anieb as he had first seen
her,    a dying woman standing alone in the tower room, was always with him.
“Real power goes to waste. Every wizard uses his arts against the others,
serving the men of greed. What good can any an be used that way? It’s
wasted.     It goes wrong, or it’s thrown away. Like slaves’ lives. Nobody can 
be
free alone. Not even a mage. All of them working their magic in prison cells,
to gain nothing. There’s no way to use power for good.”

Ayo closed her hand and opened it palm up, a fleeting sketch of a gesture, of a
sign.

A man came up the mountain to Woodedge, a charcoal burner from Firn. “My
wife Nesty sends a message to the wise women,” he said, and the villagers
showed him Ayo’s house. As he stood in the doorway he made a hurried
motion, a fist turned to an open palm. “Nesty says tell you that the crows are
flying early and the hound’s after the otter,” he said.

Otter, sitting by the fire shelling walnuts, held still. Mead thanked the
messenger and brought him in for a cup of water and a handful of shelled
nuts.   She and Ayo chatted with him about his wife. When he had gone she
turned to Otter.

“The Hound serves Losen,” he said. “I’ll go today.”

Mead looked at her sister. “Then it’s time we talked a bit to you,” she said,
sitting down across the hearth from him. Ayo stood by the table, silent. A
good fire burned in the hearth. It was a wet, cold time, and firewood was one
thing they had plenty of, here on the mountain.

“There’s people all over these parts, and maybe beyond, who think, as you
said, that nobody can be wise alone. So these people try to hold to each other.
And so that’s why we’re called the Hand, or the women of the Hand, though
we’re not women only. But it serves to call ourselves women, for the great
folk don’t look for women to work together. Or to have thoughts about such
things as rule or misrule. Or to have any powers.”

“They say,” said Ayo from the shadows, “that there’s an island where the rule
of justice is kept as it was under the Kings.

Morred s Isle, they call it. But it’s not Enlad of the Kings, nor Ea. It’s 
south,
not north of Havnor, they say. There they say the women of the Hand have
kept the old arts. And they teach them, not keeping them secret each to
himself, as the wizards do.”


“Maybe with such teaching you could teach the wizards a lesson,” Mead said.
“Maybe you can find that island,” said Ayo.

Otter looked from one to the other. Clearly they had told him their own
greatest secret and their hope.

“Morred’s Isle,” he said.

“That would be only what the women of the Hand call it, keeping its meaning
from the wizards and the pirates. To them no doubt it would bear some other
name.”

“It would be a terrible long way,” said Mead.

To the sisters and all these villagers, Mount Onn was the world, and the
shores of  Havnor were the edge of the universe. Beyond that was only rumor
and dream.

“You’ll come to the sea, going south, they say,” said Ayo.

“He knows that, sister,” Mead told her. “Didn’t he tell us he was a ship
carpenter? But it’s a terrible long way down to the sea, surely. With this
wizard on your scent, how are you to go there?”

“By the grace of water, that carries no scent,” Otter said, standing up. A 
litter
of walnut shells fell from his lap, and he took the hearth broom and swept
them into the ashes. “I’d better go.”

“There’s bread,” Ayo said, and Mead hurried to pack hard bread and hard
cheese and walnuts into a pouch made of a sheep’s stomach. They were very
poor people. They gave him what they had. So Anieb had done.

“My mother was born in Endlane, round by Faliern Forest,” Otter said. “Do
you know that town? She’s called Rose, Rowan’s daughter.”

“The carters go down to Endlane, summers.”

“If somebody could talk to her people there, they’d get word to her. Her
brother, Littleash, used to conic to the city every year or two.”

They nodded.

“If she knew I was alive,” he said.
Anieb’s mother nodded. “She’ll hear it.”
“Go on now,” said Mead.

“Go with the water,” said Ayo.

He embraced them, and they him, and he left the house.


He ran down from the straggle of huts to the quick, noisy stream he had heard
singing through his sleep all his nights in Woodedge. He prayed to it. “Take
me and save me,” he asked it. He made the spell the old Changer had taught
him long ago, and said the word of transformation. Then no man knelt by the
loud-running water, but an otter slipped into it and was gone.

III.            Tern

There was a wise man on our Hill
Who found his way to work his will.

He changed his shape, he changed his name,
But ever the other will be the same.

So runs the water away, away,
So runs the water away.

ONE WINTER AFTERNOON on the shore of the Onneva River where it
fingers out into the north bight of the Great Bay of  Havnor, a man stood up on
the muddy sand: a man poorly dressed and poorly shod, a thin brown man
with dark eyes and hair so fine and thick it shed the rain. It was raining on 
the
low beaches of the river mouth, the fine, cold, dismal drizzle of that grey
winter. His clothes were soaked. He hunched his shoulders, turned about, and
set  off towards a wisp of chimney smoke he saw far down the shore. Behind
him were the tracks of an otter’s four feet coming up from the water and the
tracks of a man’s two feet going away from it.

Where he went then, the songs don’t tell. They say only that he wandered, “he
wandered long from land to land.” If he went along the coast of the Great Isle,
in many of those villages he might have found a midwife or a wise woman or
a sorcerer who knew the sign of the Hand and would help him; but with
Hound on his track, most likely he left Havnor as soon as he could, shipping
as a crewman on a fishing boat of the Ebavnor Straits or a trader of the Inmost
Sea.

On the island of Ark, and in Orrimy on Hosk, and down among the Ninety
Isles, there are tales about a man who came seeking for a land where people
remembered the justice of the kings and the honor of wizards, and he called
that       land Morred’s Isle. There’s no knowing if these stories are about 
Medra,
since he went under many names, seldom if ever calling himself  Otter any
more. Gelluk’s fall had not brought Losen down. The pirate king had other
wizards in his pay, among them a man called Early, who would have liked to


find the young upstart who defeated his master Gelluk. And Early had a good
chance of tracing him. Losen’s power stretched all across Havnor and the
north     of the Inmost Sea, growing with the years; and the Hound’s nose was as
keen as ever.

Maybe it was to escape the hunt that Medra came to Pendor, a long way west
of the Inmost Sea, or maybe some rumor among the women of the Hand on
Hosk sent him there. Pendor was a rich island, then, before the dragon Yevaud
despoiled it. Wherever Medra had gone until then, he had found the lands like
Havnor or worse, sunk in warfare, raids, and piracy, the fields full of weeds,
the towns full of thieves. Maybe he thought, at first, that on Pendor he had
found Morred’s Isle, for the city was beautiful and peaceful and the people
prosperous.

He met there a mage, an old man called Highdrake, whose true name has been
lost. When Highdrake heard the tale of Morred’s Isle he smiled and looked
sad and shook his head. “Not here,” he said. “Not this. The Lords of  Pendor
are good men. They remember the kings. They don’t seek war or plunder. But
they send their sons west dragon hunting. In sport. As if the dragons of the
West Reach were ducks or geese for the killing! No good will come of that.”

Highdrake took Medra as his student, gratefully. “I was taught my art by a
mage who gave me freely all he knew, but I never found anybody to give that
knowledge to, until you came,” he told Medra. “The young men come to me
and      they say, “What good is it? Can you find gold?” they say. “Can you 
teach
me how to make stones into diamonds? Can you give me a sword that will kill
a dragon? What’s the use of talking about the balance of things? There’s no
profit in it,” they say. No profit!” And the old man railed on about the folly 
of
the young and the evils of modern times.

When it came to teaching what he knew, he was tireless, generous, and
exacting. For the first time, Medra was given a vision of magic not as a set of
strange gifts and reasonless acts, but as an art and a craft, which could be
known truly with long study and used rightly after long practice, though even
then it would never lose its strangeness. Highdrake’s mastery of spells and
sorcery was not much greater than his pupil’s, but he had clear in his mind the
idea of something very much greater, the wholeness of knowledge. And that
made him a mage.

Listening to him, Medra thought of how he and Anieb had walked in the dark
and rain by the faint glimmer that showed them only the next step they could
take, and of how they had looked up to the red ridge of the mountain in the
dawn.

“Every spell depends on every other spell,” said Highdrake. “Every motion of


a single leaf moves every leaf of every tree on every isle of Earthsea! There is
a pattern. That’s what you must look for and look to. Nothing goes right but
as part of the pattern. Only in it is freedom.”

Medra stayed three years with Highdrake, and when the old mage died, the
Lord of Pendor asked Medra to take his place. Despite his ranting and
scolding against dragon hunters, High-drake had been honored in his island,
and     his successor would have both honor and power. Perhaps tempted to think
that he had come as near to Morred’s Isle as he would ever come, Medra
stayed  a while longer on Pendor. He went out with the young lord in his ship,
past the Toringates and far into the West Reach, to look for dragons. There
was   a great longing in his heart to see a dragon. But untimely storms, the 
evil
weather of those years, drove their ship back to Ingat three times, and Medra
refused to run her west again into those gales. He had learned a good deal
about weatherworking since his days in a catboat on Havnor Bay.

A while after that he left Pendor, drawn southward again, and maybe went to
Ensmer. In one guise or another he came at last to Geath in the Ninety Isles.

There they fished for whales, as they still do. That was a trade he wanted no
part of. Their ships stank and their town stank. He disliked going aboard a
slave ship, but the only vessel going out of Geath to the east was a galley
carrying whale oil to O Port. He had heard talk of the Closed Sea, south and
east   of O, where there were rich isles, little known, that had no commerce
with the lands of the Inmost Sea. What he sought might be there. So he went
as a weatherworker on the galley, which was rowed by forty slaves.

The weather was fair for once: a following wind, a blue sky lively with little
white clouds, the mild sunlight of late spring. They made good way from
Geath. Late in the afternoon he heard the master say to the helmsman,  “Keep
her south tonight so we don’t raise Roke.”

He had not heard of that island, and asked, “What’s there?”

“Death and desolation,” said the ship’s master, a short man with small, sad,
knowing eyes like a whale’s.

“War?”

“Years back. Plague, black sorcery. The waters all round it are cursed.”

“Worms,” said the helmsman,  the master’s brother. “Catch fish anywhere  near
Roke, you’ll find em thick with worms as a dead dog on a dunghill.”

“Do people still live there?” Medra asked, and the master said, “Witches,”
while his brother said, “Worm eaters.”

There were many such isles in the Archipelago,  made barren and desolate by


rival wizards’ blights and curses; they were evil places to come to or even to
pass, and Medra thought no more about this one, until that night.

Sleeping out on deck with the starlight on his face, he had a simple, vivid
dream: it was daylight, clouds racing across a bright sky, and across the sea he
saw the sunlit curve of a high green hill. He woke with the vision still clear 
in
his mind, knowing he had seen it ten years before, in the spell-locked barracks
room at the mines of Samory.

He sat up. The dark sea was so quiet that the stars were reflected here and
there on the sleek lee side of the long swells. Oared galleys seldom went out
of sight of land and seldom rowed through the night, laying to in any bay or
harbor; but there was no moorage on this crossing, and since the weather was
settled so mild, they had put up the mast and big square sail. The ship drifted
softly forward, her slave oarsmen sleeping on their benches, the free men of
her crew all asleep but the helmsman and the lookout, and the lookout was
dozing. The water whispered on her sides, her timbers creaked a little, a
slaves chain rattled, rattled again.

“They don’t need a weatherworker  on a night like this, and they haven’t paid
me yet,” Medra said to his conscience. He had waked from his dream with the
name Roke in his mind. Why had he never heard of the isle or seen it on a
chart? It might be accursed and deserted as they said, but wouldn’t it be set
down on the charts?

“I could fly there as a tern and be back on the ship before daylight,” he said 
to
himself, but idly. He was bound for O Port. Ruined lands were all too
common. No need to fly to seek them. He made himself  comfortable in his
coil of cable and watched the stars. Looking west, he saw the four bright stars
of the Forge, low over the sea. They were a little blurred, and as he watched
them they blinked out, one by one.

The faintest little sighing tremor ran over the slow, smooth swells.
“Master,”  Medra said, afoot, “wake up.”

“What now?”

“A witchwind coming. Following. Get the sail down.”

No wind stirred. The air was soft, the big sail hung slack. Only the western
stars faded and vanished in a silent blackness that rose slowly higher. The
master looked at that. “Witchwind, you say?” he asked, reluctant.

Crafty men used weather as a weapon, sending hail to blight an enemy’s crops
or a gale to sink his ships; and such storms, freakish and wild, might blow on
far past the place they had been sent, troubling harvesters or sailors a 
hundred


miles away.

“Get the sail down,” Medra said, peremptory.  The master yawned and cursed
and began to shout commands. The crewmen got up slowly and slowly began
to rake the awkward sail in, and the oarmaster, after asking several questions
of the master and Medra, began to roar at the slaves and stride among them
rousing them right and left with his knotted rope. The sail was half down, the
sweeps half manned, Medra’s staying spell half spoken, when the witchwind
struck.

It struck with one huge thunderclap out of sudden utter blackness and wild
rain. The ship pitched like a horse rearing and then rolled so hard and far that
the mast broke loose from its footing, though the stays held. The sail struck
the water, filled, and pulled the galley right over, the great sweeps sliding in
their oarlocks, the chained slaves struggling and shouting on their benches,
barrels of oil breaking loose and thundering over one another-pulled her over
and held her over, the deck vertical to the sea, till a huge storm wave struck
and swamped her and she sank. All the shouting and screaming of men’s
voices was suddenly silent. There was no noise but the roar of the rain on the
sea, lessening as the freak wind passed on eastward. Through it one white
seabird beat its wings up from the black water and flew, frail and desperate, to
the north.

Printed on narrow sands under granite cliffs, in the first light, were the 
tracks
of a bird alighting. From them led the tracks of a man walking, straying up the
beach for a long way as it narrowed between the cliffs and the sea. Then the
tracks ceased.

Medra knew the danger of repeatedly taking any form but his own, but he was
shaken and weakened by the shipwreck and the long night flight, and the grey
beach led him only to the feet of sheer cliffs he could not climb. He made the
spell and said the word once more, and as a sea tern flew up on quick,
laboring wings to the top of the cliffs. Then, possessed by flight, he flew on
over       a shadowy sunrise land. Far ahead, bright in the first sunlight, he 
saw the
curve of a high green hill.

To it he flew, and on it landed, and as he touched the earth he was a man
again.

He stood there for a while, bewildered.  It seemed to him that it was not by his
own act or decision that he had taken his own form, but that in touching this
ground, this hill, he had become himself. A magic greater than his own
prevailed here.

He looked about, curious and wary. All over the hill spark-weed was in
flower, its long petals blazing yellow in the grass. Children on Havnor knew


that flower. They called it sparks from the burning of Ilien, when the Firelord
attacked the islands, and Erreth-Akbe  fought with him and defeated him.

Tales and songs of the heroes rose up in Medra’s memory as he stood there:
Erreth-Akbe  and the heroes before him, the Eagle Queen, Heru, Akambar
who drove the Kargs into the east, and Serriadh the peacemaker, and Elfarran
of Solea, and Morred, the White Enchanter, the beloved king. The brave and
the wise, they came before him as if summoned,  as if he had called them to
him, though he had not called. He saw them. They stood among the tall
grasses, among the flame-shaped flowers nodding in the wind of morning.

Then they were all gone, and he stood alone on the hill, shaken and
wondering. “I have seen the queens and kings of Eanhsea,” he thought, “and
they     are only the grass that grows on this hill.”

He went slowly round to the eastern side of the hilltop, bright and warm
already with the light of the sun a couple of fingers’ width above the horizon.
Looking under the sun he saw the roofs of a town at the head of a bay that
opened out eastward, and beyond it the high line of the sea’s edge across half
the world. Turning west he saw fields and pastures and roads. To the nonh
were long green hills. In a fold of land southward a grove of tall trees drew
his gaze and held it. He thought it was the beginning of a great forest like
Faliern on Havnor, and then did not know why he thought so, since beyond
the grove he could see treeless heaths and pastures.

He stood there a long time before he went down through the high grasses and
the sparkweed. At the foot of the hill he came into a lane. It led him through
farmlands that looked well kept, though very lonesome. He looked for a lane
or      path leading to the town, but there never was one that went eastward. 
Not a
soul was in the fields, some of which were newly ploughed. No dog barked as
he went by. Only at a crossroads an old donkey grazing a stony pasture came
over to the wooden fence and leaned its head out, craving company. Medra
stopped to stroke the grey-brown, bony face. A city man and a saltwater man,
he knew little of farms and their animals, but he thought the donkey looked at
him kindly.

“Where am I, donkey?” he said to it. “How do I get to the town I saw?”

The donkey leaned its head hard against his hand so that he would go on
scratching the place just above its eyes and below its ears. When he did so, it
flicked  its long right ear. So when he parted from the donkey he took the right
hand of the crossroad, though it looked as if it would lead back to the hill; 
and
soon enough he came among houses, and then onto a street that brought him
down at last into the town at the head of the bay.

It was as strangely quiet as the farmlands. Not a voice, not a face. It was


difficult to feel uneasy in an ordinary-looking town on a sweet spring
morning, but in such silence he must wonder if he was indeed in a plague-
stricken place or an island under a curse. He went on. Between a house and an
old plum tree was a wash line, the clothes pinned on it flapping in the sunny
breeze. A cat came round the corner of a garden, no abandoned starveling but
a white-pawed, well-whiskered, prosperous cat. And at last, coming down the
steep little street, which here was cobbled, he heard voices.

He stopped to listen, and heard nothing.

He went on to the foot of the street. It opened into a small market square.
People were gathered there, not many of them. They were not buying or
selling. There were no booths or stalls set up. They were waiting for him.

Ever since he had walked on the green hill above the town and had seen the
bright shadows in the grass, his heart had been easy. He was expectant, full of
a sense of  great strangeness, but not frightened. He stood still and looked at
the people who came to meet him.

Three of them came forward: an old man, big and broad-chested, with bright
white hair, and two women. Wizard knows wizard, and Medra knew they
were women of  power.

He raised his hand closed in a fist and then turning and opening it, offered it
to them palm up.

“Ah,” said one of the women, the taller of the two, and she laughed. But she
did not answer the gesture.

“Tell us who you are,” the white-haired  man said, courteously enough, but
without greeting or welcome. “Tell us how you came here.”

“I was born in Havnor and trained as a shipwright and a sorcerer. I was on a
ship bound from Geath to 0  Port. I was spared alone from drowning, last
night, when a witchwind struck.” He was silent then. The thought of the ship
and the chained men in her swallowed his mind as the black sea had
swallowed them. He gasped, as if coming up from drowning.

“How did you come here?”

“As... as a bird, a tern. Is this Roke Island?”
“You changed yourself?”

He nodded.

“Whom do you serve?” asked the shorter and younger of the women,
speaking for the first time. She had a keen, hard face, with long black brows.

“I have no master.”


“What was your errand in O Port?”

“In Havnor, years ago, I was in servitude. Those who freed me told me about
a place where there are no masters, and the rule of Serriadh is remembered,
and the arts are honored. I have been looking for that place, that island, seven
years.”

“Who told you about it?”
“Women of the Hand.”

“Anyone can make a fist and show a palm,” said the tall woman, pleasantly.
“But not everyone can fly to Roke. Or swim, or sail, or come in any way at
all. So we must ask what brought you here.”

Medra did not answer at once. “Chance,” he said at last, “favoring long
desire. Not art. Not knowledge. I think I’ve come to the place I sought, but I
don’t know. I think you may be the people they told me of, but I don’t know. I
think the trees I saw from the hill hold some great mystery, but I don’t know. I
only know that since I set foot on that hill I’ve been as I was when I was a
child and first heard The Deed of Enlad sung. I am lost among wonders.”

The white-haired  man looked at the two women. Other people had come
forward, and there was some quiet talk among them.

“If you stayed here, what would you do?” the black-browed woman asked
him.

“I can build boats, or mend them, and sail them. I can find, above and under
ground. I can work weather, if you have any need of that. And I’ll learn the
art from any who will teach me.”

“What do you want to learn?” asked the taller woman in her mild voice.

Now Medra felt that he had been asked the question on which the rest of his
life hung, for good or evil. Again he stood silent a while. He started to speak,
and didn’t speak, and finally spoke. “I could not save one, not one, not the
one who saved me,” he said. “Nothing I know could have set her free. I know
nothing. If you know how to be free, I beg you, teach me!”

“Free!” said the tall woman, and her voice cracked like a whip. Then she
looked at her companions, and after a while she smiled a little. Turning back
to Medra, she said, “We’re prisoners, and so freedom is a thing we study. You
came here through the walls of our prison. Seeking freedom, you say. But you
should know that leaving Roke may be even harder than coming to it. Prison
within prison, and some of it we have built ourselves.” She looked at the
others. “What do you say?” she asked them.

They said little, seeming to consult and assent among themselves almost in


silence. At last the shorter woman looked with her fierce eyes at Medra. “Stay
if you will,” she said.

“I will.”

“What will you have us call you?”
“Tern,” he said; and so he was called.

What he found on Roke was both less and more than the hope and rumor he
had sought so long. Roke Island was, they told him, the heart of Earthsea. The
first land Segoy raised from the waters in the beginning of time was bright Ea
of the nonhern sea, and the second was Roke. That green hill, Roke Knoll,
was founded deeper than all the islands. The trees he had seen, which seemed
sometimes to be in one place on the isle and sometimes in another, were the
oldest  trees in the world, and the source and center of magic.

“If the Grove were cut, all wizardry would fail. The roots of those trees are
the roots of knowledge. The patterns the shadows of their leaves make in the
sunlight write the words Segoy spoke in the Making.”

So said Ember, his fierce, black-browed  teacher.

All the teachers of the art magic on Roke were women. There were no men of
power, few men at all, on the island.

Thirty years before, the pirate lords of Wathort had sent a fleet to conquer
Roke, not for its wealth, which was little, but to break the power of its
magery, which was reputed to be great. One of the wizards of Roke had
betrayed   the island to the crafty men of Wathort, lowering its spells of 
defense
and warning. Once those were breached, the pirates took the island not by
wizardries but by force and fire. Their great ships filled Thwil Bay, their
hordes   burned and looted, their slave takers carried off men, boys, young
women. Little children and the old they slaughtered. They fired every house
and  field they came to. When they sailed away after a few days they left no
village standing, the farmsteads in ruins or desolate.

The town at the bay’s head, Thwil, shared something of the uncanniness of
the Knoll and the Grove, for though the raiders had run through it seeking
slaves and plunder and setting fires, the fires had gone out and the narrow

streets had sent the marauders astray. Most of the islanders who survived were
wise women and their children, who had hidden themselves in the town or in
the Immanent Grove. The men now on Roke were those spared children,
grown, and a few men now grown old. There was no government but that of
the women of the Hand, for it was their spells that had protected Roke so long


and protected it far more closely now.

They had little trust in men. A man had betrayed them. Men had attacked
them. It was men’s ambitions, they said, that had perverted all the arts to ends
of  gain. “We do not deal with their governments,”  said tall Veil in her mild
voice.

And yet Ember said to Medra, “We were our own undoing.”

Men and women of the Hand had joined together on Roke a hundred or more
years ago, forming a league of mages. Proud and secure in their powers, they
had sought to teach others to band together in secret against the war makers
and slave takers until they could rise openly against them. Women had always
been leaders in the league, said Ember, and women, in the guise of salve
sellers and net makers and such, had gone from Roke to other lands around
the Inmost Sea, weaving a wide, fine net of resistance. Even now there were
strands and knots of that net left. Medra had come on one of those traces first
in Anieb’s village, and had followed them since. But they had not led him
here. Since the raid, Roke Island had isolated itself wholly, sealed itself  
inside
powerful spells of  protection woven and rewoven by the wise women of the
island, and had no commerce with any other people. “We can’t save them,”
Ember said. “We couldn’t save ourselves.”

Veil, with her gentle voice and smile, was implacable. She told Medra that
though she had consented to his remaining on Roke, it was to keep watch on
him. “You broke through our defenses once,” she said. “All that you say of
yourself  may be true, and may not. What can you tell me that would make me
trust you?”

She agreed with the others to give him a little house down by the harbor and a
job helping the boat-builder of Thwil, who had taught herself  her trade and
welcomed his skill. Veil put no difficulties in his path and always greeted him
kindly. But she had said, “What can you tell me that would make me trust
you?” and he had no answer for her.

Ember usually scowled when he greeted her. She asked him abrupt questions,
listened to his answers, and said nothing.

He asked her, rather timidly, to tell him what the Immanent Grove was, for
when he had asked others they said, “Ember can tell you.” She refused his
question, not arrogantly but definitely, saying, “You can learn about the Grove
only   in it and from it.” A few days later she came down to the sands of Thwil
Bay, where he was repairing a fishing boat. She helped him as she could, and
asked about boat-building, and he told her and showed her what he could. It
was   a peaceful afternoon, but after it she went off in her abrupt way. He felt
some awe of her; she was incalculable. He was amazed when, not long after,


she said to him, “I’ll be going to the Grove after the Long Dance. Come if
you like.”

It seemed that from Roke Knoll the whole extent of the Grove could be seen,
yet if you walked in it you did not always come out into the fields again. You
walked on under the trees. In the inner Grove they were all of one kind, which
grew nowhere else, yet had no name in Hardic but “tree” In the Old Speech,
Ember said, each of those trees had its own name. You walked on, and after a
time you were walking again among familiar trees, oak and beech and ash,
chestnut and walnut and willow, green in spring and bare in winter; there
were     dark firs, and cedar, and a tall evergreen Medra did not know, with 
soft
reddish bark and layered foliage. You walked on, and the way through the
trees   was never twice the same. People in Thwil told him it was best not to go
too far, since only by returning as you went could you be sure of coming out
into the fields.

“How far does the forest go?” Medra asked, and Ember said, “As far as the
mind goes.”

The leaves of the trees spoke, she said, and the shadows could be read. “I am
learning to read them,” she said.

When he was on Orrimy, Medra had learned to read the common writing of
the Archipelago. Later, Highdrake of Pendor had taught him some of the
runes of  power. That was known lore. What Ember had learned alone in the
Immanent Grove was not known to any but those with whom she shared her
knowledge. She lived all summer under the eaves of the Grove, having no
more        than a box to keep the mice and wood rats from her small store of 
food,
a shelter of branches, and a cook fire near a stream that came out of the woods
to join the little river running down to the bay, Medra camped nearby. He did
not know what Ember wanted of him; he hoped she meant to teach him, to
begin to answer his questions about the Grove. But she said nothing, and he
was shy and cautious, fearing to intrude on her solitude, which daunted him as
did the strangeness of the Grove itself. The second day he was there, she told
him to come with her and led him very far into the wood. They walked for
hours in silence. In the summer midday the woods were silent. No bird sang.

The leaves did not stir. The aisles of the trees were endlessly different and 
all
the same. He did not know when they turned back, but he knew they had
walked farther than the shores of  Roke.

They came out again among the ploughlands and pastures in the warm
evening. As they walked back to their camping place he saw the four stars of
the Forge come out above the western hills.

Ember parted from him with only a “Good night.”


The next day she said, “I’m going to sit under the trees.” Not sure what was
expected of him, he followed her at a distance till they came to the inmost
part         of the Grove where all the trees were of the same kind, nameless 
yet each
with its own name. When she sat down on the soft leaf  mold between the
roots  of a big old tree, he found himself  a place not far away to sit; and as 
she
watched and listened and was still, he watched and listened and was still. So
they   did for several days. Then one morning, in rebellious mood, he stayed by
the stream while Ember walked into the Grove. She did not look back.

Veil came from Thwil Town that morning, bringing them a basket of bread,
cheese, milk curds, summer fruits. “What have you learned?” she asked
Medra in her cool, gentle way, and he answered, “That I’m a fool.”

“Why so, Tern?”

“A fool could sit under the trees forever and grow no wiser.”

The tall woman smiled a little. “My sister has never taught a man before” she
said. She glanced at him, and gazed away, over the summery fields. “She’s
never looked at a man before,” she said.

Medra stood silent. His face felt hot. He looked down. “I thought,” he said,
and stopped.

In Veil’s words he saw, all at once, the other side of Ember’s impatience, her
fierceness, her silences.

He had tried to look at Ember as untouchable while he longed to touch her
soft brown skin, her black shining hair. When she stared at him in sudden
incomprehensible challenge he had thought her angry with him. He feared to
insult,           to offend her. What did she fear? His desire? Her own?- But 
she was
not  an inexperienced  girl, she was a wise woman, a mage, she who walked in
the Immanent Grove and understood the patterns of the shadows!

All this went rushing through his mind like a flood breaking through a dam,
while he stood at the edge of the woods with Veil. “I thought mages kept
themselves apart,” he said at last. “High-drake said that to make love is to
unmake power.”

“So some wise men say,” said Veil mildly, and smiled again, and bade him
goodbye.

He spent the whole afternoon in confusion, angry. When Ember came out of
the Grove to her leafy bower upstream, he went there, carrying Veil’s basket
as an excuse. “May I talk to you?” he said.

She nodded shortly, frowning her black brows.

He said nothing. She squatted down to find out what was in the basket.


"Peaches!” she said, and smiled.

“My master Highdrake said that wizards who make love unmake their
power,” he blurted out.

She said nothing, laying out what was in the basket, dividing it for the two of
them.

“Do you think that’s true?” he asked.
She shrugged. "No,” she said.

He stood tongue-tied. After a while she looked up at him. "No,” she said in a
soft, quiet voice, “I don’t think it’s true. I think all the true powers, all 
the old
powers, at root are one.”

He still stood there, and she said, “Look at the peaches! They’re all ripe.
We’ll have to eat them right away.”

“If I told you my name,” he said, "my true name-"

“I’d tell you mine,” she said. “If that... if that’s how we should begin.”
They began, however, with the peaches.

They were both shy. When Medra took her hand his hand shook, and Ember,
whose name was Elehal, turned away scowling. Then she touched his hand
very lightly. When he stroked the sleek black flow of her hair she seemed
only to endure his touch, and he stopped. When he tried to embrace her she
was stiff, rejecting him. Then she turned and, fierce, hasty, awkward, seized
him in her arms. It wasn’t the first night, nor the first nights, they passed
together that gave either of them much pleasure or ease. But they learned
from   each other, and came through shame and fear into passion. Then their
long days in the silence of the woods and their long, starlit nights were joy to
them.

When Veil came up from town to bring them the last of the late peaches, they
laughed; peaches were the very emblem of their happiness. They tried to
make her stay and eat supper with them, but she wouldn’t. “Stay here while
you can,” she said.

The summer ended too soon that year. Rain came early; snow fell in autumn
even as far south as Roke. Storm followed storm, as if the winds had risen in
rage against the tampering and meddling of the crafty men. Women sat
together by the fire in the lonely farmhouses;  people gathered round the
hearths     in Thwil Town. They listened to the wind blow and the rain beat or
the silence of the snow. Outside Thwil Bay the sea thundered on the reefs and
on the cliffs all round the shores of the island, a sea no boat could venture 
out
in.


What they had they shared. In that it was indeed Morred’s Isle. Nobody on
Roke starved or went unhoused, though nobody had much more than they
needed. Hidden from the rest of the world not only by sea and storm but by
their defenses that disguised the island and sent ships astray, they worked and
talked and sang the songs, The Winter Carol and The Deed of the Young
King. And they had books, the Chronicles of Enlad and the History of the
Wise Heroes. From these precious books the old men and women would read
aloud in a hall down by the wharf where the fisherwomen made and mended
their nets. There was a hearth there, and they would light the fire. People
came even from farms across the island to hear the histories read, listening in
silence, intent. “Our souls are hungry,” Ember said.

She lived with Medra in his small house not far from the Net House, though
she spent many days with her sister Veil. Ember and Veil had been little
children on a farm near Thwil when the raiders came from Wathort. Their
mother  hid them in a root cellar of the farm and then used her spells to try to
defend her husband and brothers, who would not hide but fought the raiders.
They were butchered with their cattle. The house and barns were burnt. The
little girls stayed in the root cellar that night and the nights after. 
Neighbors
who came at last to bury the rotting bodies found the two children, silent,
starving, armed with a mattock and a broken ploughshare, ready to defend the
heaps of stones and eanh they had piled over their dead.

Medra knew only a hint of this story from Ember. One night Veil, who was
three years older than Ember and to whom the memory was much clearer, told
it to him fully. Ember sat with them, listening in silence.

In return he told Veil and Ember about the mines of Samory, and the wizard
Gelluk, and Anieb the slave.

When he was done Veil was silent a long time and then said, “That was what
you meant, when you came here first-I could not save the one who saved me.”

“And you asked me, What can you tell me that could make me trust you?”
“You have told me,” Veil said.

Medra took her hand and put his forehead against it. Telling his story he had
kept back tears. He could not do so now.

“She gave me freedom,” he said. “And I still feel that all I do is done through
her and for her. No, not for her. We can do nothing for the dead. But for...”

“For us,” said Ember. “For us who live, in hiding, neither killed nor killing.
The dead are dead. The great and mighty go their way unchecked. All the
hope left in the world is in the people of no account.”


“Must we hide forever?”

“Spoken like a man,” said Veil with her gentle, wounded smile.

“Yes,” said Ember. “We must hide, and forever if  need be. Because there’s
nothing left but being killed and killing, beyond these shores. You say it, and 
I
believe it.”

“But you can’t hide true power,” Medra said. “Not for long. It dies in hiding,
unshared.”

“Magic won’t die on Roke,” said Veil. “On Roke all spells are strong. So said
Ath himself. And you have walked under the trees... Our job must be to keep
that strength. Hide it, yes. Hoard it, as a young dragon hoards up its fire. And
share it. But only here. Pass it on, one to the next, here, where it’s safe, and
where the great robbers and killers would least look for it, since no one here 
is
of any account. And one day the dragon will come into its strength. If it takes
a thousand years...”

“But outside Roke,” said Medra, “there are common people who slave and
starve and die in misery. Must they do so for a thousand years with no hope?”

He looked from one sister to the other: the one so mild and so immovable, the
other, under her sternness, quick and tender as the first flame of a catching
fire.

“On Havnor,” he said,” far from Roke, in a village on Mount Onn, among
people who know nothing of the world, there are still women of the Hand.
That net hasn’t broken after so many years. How was it woven?”

“Craftily,” said Ember.

“And cast wide!” He looked from one to the other again. “I wasn’t well
taught, in the City of Havnor,” he said. “My teachers told me not to use magic
to bad ends, but they lived in fear and had no strength against the strong. They
gave me all they had to give, but it was little. It was by mere luck I didn’t go
wrong. And by Anieb’s gift of strength to me. But for her I’d be Gelluk’s
servant now. Yet she herself was untaught, and so enslaved. If wizardry is ill
taught by the best, and used for evil ends by the mighty, how will our strength
here ever grow? What will the young dragon feed on?”

“This is the center,” said Veil. “We must keep to the center. And wait.”

“We must give what we have to give,” said Medra. “If all but us are slaves,
what’s our freedom worth?”

“The true art prevails over the false. The pattern will hold,” Ember said,
frowning. She reached out the poker to gather together her namesakes in the
hearth, and with a whack knocked the heap into a blaze. “That I know. But


our lives are short, and the patterns very long. If only Roke was now what it
once was- if we had more people of the true art gathered here, teaching and
learning as well as preserving-“

“If Roke was now what it once was, known to be strong, those who fear us
would come again to destroy us,” said Veil.

“The solution lies in secrecy,” said Medra. “But so does the problem.”

“Our problem is with men,” Veil said, “if you’ll forgive me, dear brother. Men
are of more account to other men than women and children are. We might
have fifty witches here and they’ll pay little heed. But if they knew we had
five men of  power, they’d seek to destroy us again.”

“So though there were men among us we were the women of the Hand,” said
Ember.

“You still are,” Medra said. “Anieb was one of you. She and you and all of  us
live in the same prison.”

“What can we do?” said Veil.
“Learn our strength!” said Medra.

“A school,” Ember said. “Where the wise might come to learn from one
another, to study the pattern...The Grove would shelter us.”

“The lords of war despise scholars and schoolmasters,” said Medra.
“I think they fear them too,” said Veil.

So they talked, that long winter, and others talked with them. Slowly their talk
turned from vision to intention, from longing to planning. Veil was always
cautious, warning of dangers. White-haired  Dune was so eager that Ember
said he wanted to start teaching sorcery to every child in Thwil. Once Ember
had come to believe that Roke’s freedom lay in offering others freedom, she
set her whole mind on how the women of the Hand might grow strong again.
But her mind, formed by her long solitudes among the trees, always sought
form and clarity, and she said, “How can we teach our art when we don’t
know what it is?”

And they talked about that, all the wise women of the island: what was the
true art of  magic, and where did it turn false; how the balance of things was
kept or lost; what crafts were needful, which useful, which dangerous; why
some people had one gift but not another, and whether you could learn an art
you had no native gift for. In such discussions they worked out the names that
ever since have been given to the masteries: finding, weather-working,
changing, healing, summoning,  patterning,  naming, and the crafts of illusion,
and    the knowledge of the songs. Those are the arts of the Masters of  Roke


even now, though the Chanter took the Finder’s place when finding came to
be considered a merely useful craft unworthy of a mage.

And it was in these discussions that the school on Roke began.

There are some who say that the school had its beginnings far differently.
They say that Roke used to be ruled by a woman called the Dark Woman,
who was in league with the Old Powers of the eanh. They say she lived in a
cave under Roke Knoll, never coming into the daylight, but weaving vast
spells over land and sea that compelled men to her evil will, until the first
Archmage came to Roke, unsealed and entered the cave, defeated the Dark
Woman, and took her place.

There’s no truth in this tale but one, which is that indeed one of the first
Masters of Roke opened and entered a great cavern. But though the roots of
Roke are the roots of all the islands, that cavern was not on Roke.

And it’s true that in the time of Medra and Elehal the people of  Roke, men
and women, had no fear of the Old Powers of the earth, but revered them,
seeking strength and vision from them. That changed with the years.

Spring came late again that year, cold and stormy. Medra set to boat-building.
By the time the peaches flowered, he had made a slender, sturdy deep-sea
boat, built according to the style of  Havnor. He called her Hopeful. Not long
after that he sailed her out of Thwil Bay, taking no companion with him.
“Look for me at the end of summer,” he said to Ember.

“I’ll be in the Grove,” she said. “And my heart with you, my dark otter, my
white tern, my love, Medra.”

“And mine with you, my ember of fire, my flowering tree, my love, Elehal.”

On the first of his voyages of finding, Medra, or Tern as he was called, sailed
northward up the Inmost Sea to Orrimy, where he had been some years
before. There were people of the Hand there whom he trusted. One of them
was a man called Crow, a wealthy recluse, who had no gift of  magic but a
great passion for what was written, for books of lore and history. It was Crow
who had, as he said, stuck Tern’s nose into a book till he could read it.
“Illiterate wizards are the curse of Earthsea!” he cried. “Ignorant  power is a
bane!” Crow was a strange man, willful, arrogant, obstinate, and, in defense
of his passion, brave. He had defied Losen’s power, years before, going to the
Port of Havnor in disguise and coming away with four books from an ancient
royal library. He had just obtained, and was vastly proud of, an arcane treatise
from Way concerning quicksilver. “Got that from under Losen’s nose too,” he
said to Tern. “Come have a look at it! It belonged to a famous wizard.”

“Tinaral,” said Tern. “I knew him.”


“Book’s trash, is it?” said Crow, who was quick to pick up signals if they had
to do with books.

“I don’t know. I’m after bigger prey.”
Crow cocked his head.

“The Book of  Names.”

“Lost with Ath when he went into the west,” Crow said.

“A mage called Highdrake told me that when Ath stayed in Pendor, he told a
wizard there that he’d left the Book of  Names with a woman in the Ninety
Isles for safekeeping.”

“A woman! For safekeeping!  In the Ninety Isles! Was he mad?”

Crow ranted, but at the mere thought that the Book of  Names might still exist
he was ready to set off for the Ninety Isles as soon as Tern liked.

So they sailed south in Hopeful, landing first at malodorous Geath, and then
in the guise of  peddlers working their way from one islet to the next among
the mazy channels. Crow had stocked the boat with better wares than most
householders  of the Isles were used to seeing, and Tern offered them at fair
prices, mostly in barter, since there was little money among the islanders.

Their popularity ran ahead of them. It was known that they would trade for
books, if the books were old and uncanny. But in the Isles all books were old
and all uncanny, what there was of them.

Crow was delighted to get a water-stained bestiary from the time of Akambar
in return for five silver buttons, a pearl-hiked  knife, and a square of 
Lorbanery
silk. He sat in Hopeful and crooned over the antique descriptions of harikki
and otak and icebear. But Tern went ashore on every isle, showing his wares
in the kitchens of the housewives and the sleepy taverns where the old men
sat. Sometimes he idly made a fist and then turned his hand over opening the
palm, but nobody here returned the sign.

“Books?” said a rush plaiter on North Sudidi. “Like that there?” He pointed to
long strips of vellum that had been worked into the thatching of his house.
“They good for something else?” Crow, staring up at the words visible here
and there between the rushes in the eaves, began to tremble with rage. Tern
hurried him back to the boat before he exploded.

“It was only a beast healer’s manual,” Crow admitted, when they were sailing
on and he had calmed down. “’Spavined,”  I saw, and something about ewes’
udders. But the ignorance! the brute ignorance! To roof  his house with it!”

“And it was useful knowledge,” Tern said. “How can people be anything but
ignorant when knowledge isn’t saved, isn’t taught? If books could be brought


together in one place...”

“Like the Library of the Kings,” said Crow, dreaming of lost glories.

“Or your library,” said Tern, who had become a subtler man than he used to
be.

“Fragments,”  Crow said, dismissing his life’s work. “Remnants!”
“Beginnings,” said Tern.

Crow only sighed.

“I think we might go south again,” Tern said, steering for the open channel.
“Towards Pody.”

“You have a gift for the business,” Crow said. “You know where to look.
Went straight to that bestiary in the barn loft... But there’s nothing much to
look for here. Nothing of importance. Ath wouldn’t have left the greatest of
all the lore-books among boors who’d make thatch of it! Take us to Pody if
you like. And then back to Orrimy. I’ve had about enough.”

“And we’re out of buttons,” Tern said. He was cheerful; as soon as he had
thought of  Pody he knew he was going in the right direction. “Perhaps I can
find some along the way,” he said. “It’s my gift, you know.”

Neither of them had been on Pody. It was a sleepy southern island with a
pretty old port town, Telio, built of rosy sandstone, and fields and orchards
that should have been fertile. But the lords of Wathort had ruled it for a
century, taxing and slave taking and wearing the land and people down. The
sunny streets of Telio were sad and dirty. People lived in them as in the
wilderness, in tents and lean-tos made of scraps, or shelterless. “Oh, this
won’t        do,” Crow said, disgusted, avoiding a pile of human excrement. 
“These
creatures don’t have books, Tern!”

“Wait, wait,” his companion said. “Give me a day.”

“It’s dangerous,” Crow said, “it’s pointless,” but he made no further objection.
The modest, naive young man whom he had taught to read had become his
unfathomable guide.

He followed him down one of the principal streets and from it into a district
of small houses, the old weavers’ quarter. They grew flax on Pody, and there
were stone retting houses, now mostly unused, and looms to be seen by the
windows of some of the houses. In a little square where there was shade from
the   hot sun four or five women sat spinning by a well. Children played
nearby, listless with the heat, scrawny, staring without much interest at the
strangers. Tern had walked there unhesitating, as if he knew where he was
going. Now he stopped and greeted the women.


“Oh, pretty man,” said one of them with a smile, “don’t even show us what
you have in your pack there, for I haven’t a penny of copper or ivory, nor seen
one for a month.”

“You might have a bit of linen, though, mistress? woven, or thread? Linen of
Pody is the best-so I’ve heard as far as Havnor. And I can tell the quality of
what you’re spinning. A beautiful thread it is.” Crow watched his companion
with amusement  and some disdain;  he himself could bargain for a book very
shrewdly,  but nattering with common women about buttons and thread was
beneath him. “Let me just open this up,” Tern was saying as he spread his
pack out on the cobbles, and the women and the dirty, timid children drew
closer to see the wonders he would show them. “Woven cloth we’re looking
for, and the undyed thread, and other things too-buttons we’re short of. If you
had any of horn or bone, maybe? I’d trade one of these little velvet caps here
for three or four buttons. Or one of these rolls of ribbon; look at the color of
it. Beautiful with your hair, mistress!  Or paper, or books. Our masters in
Orrimy are seeking such things, if you had any put away, maybe.”

“Oh, you are a pretty man,” said the woman who had spoken first, laughing,
as he held the red ribbon up to her black braid. “And I wish I had something
for you!”

“I won’t be so bold as to ask for a kiss,” said Medra, “but an open hand,
maybe?”

He made the sign; she looked at him for a moment. “That’s easy,” she said
softly, and made the sign in return, “but not always safe, among strangers.”

He went on showing his wares and joking with the women and children.
Nobody bought anything. They gazed at the trinkets as if they were treasures.
He   let them gaze and finger all they would; indeed he let one of the children
filch a little mirror of polished brass, seeing it vanish under the ragged shirt
and saying nothing. At last he said he must go on, and the children drifted
away as he folded up his pack.

“I have a neighbor,” said the black-braided woman, “who might have some
paper, if you’re after that.”

“Written on?” said Crow, who had been sitting on the well coping, bored.
“Marks on it?”

She looked him up and down. “Marks on it, sir,” she said. And then, to Tern,
in a different tone, “If you’d like to come with me, she lives this way. And
though she’s only a girl, and poor, I’ll tell you, peddler, she has an open 
hand.
Though perhaps not all of us do.”


“Three out of three,” said Crow, sketching the sign, “so spare your vinegar,
woman.”

“Oh, it’s you who have it to spare, sir. We’re poor folk here. And ignorant,”
she said, with a flash of her eyes, and led on.

She brought them to a house at the end of a lane. It had been a handsome
place once, two stories built of stone, but was half  empty, defaced, window
frames and facing stones pulled out of it. They crossed a courtyard with a well
in   it. She knocked at a side door, and a girl opened it.

“Ach, it’s a witch’s den,” Crow said, at the whiff  of herbs and aromatic
smoke, and he stepped back.

“Healers,”  their guide said. “Is she ill again, Dory?”

The girl nodded, looking at Tern, then at Crow. She was thirteen or fourteen,
heavyset though thin, with a sullen, steady gaze.

“They’re men of the Hand, Dory, one short and pretty and one tall and proud,
and they say they’re seeking papers. I know you had some once, though you
may not now. They’ve nothing you need in their pack, but it might be they’d
pay a bit of ivory for what they want. Is it so?” She turned her bright eyes on
Tern, and he nodded.

“She’s very sick, Rush,” the girl said. She looked again at Tern. “You’re not a
healer?” It was an accusation.

“No.”

“She is,” said Rush. “Like her mother and her mother’s mother. Let us in,
Dory, or me at least, to speak to her.” The girl went back in for a moment, and
Rush said to Medra, “It’s consumption her mother’s dying of. No healer could
cure her. But she could heal the scrofula, and touch for pain. A wonder she
was, and Dory bade fair to follow her.”

The girl motioned them to come in. Crow chose to wait outside. The room
was high and long, with traces of former elegance, but very old and very poor.
Healers’ paraphernalia and drying herbs were everywhere, though ranged in
some order. Near the fine stone fireplace, where a tiny wisp of sweet herbs
burned, was a bedstead. The woman in it was so wasted that in the dim light
she seemed nothing but bone and shadow. As Tern came close she tried to sit
up and to speak. Her daughter raised her head on the pillow, and when Tern
was very near he could hear her: “Wizard,” she said. “Not by chance.”

A woman of  power, she knew what he was. Had she called him there?
“I’m a finder,” he said. “And a seeker.”


“Can you teach her?”

“I can take her to those who can.”
“Do it.”

“I will.”

She laid her head back and closed her eyes.

Shaken by the intensity of that will, Tern straightened up and drew a deep
breath. He looked round at the girl, Dory. She did not return his gaze,
watching  her mother with stolid, sullen grief. Only after the woman sank into
sleep did Dory move, going to help Rush, who as a friend and neighbor had
made herself useful and was gathering up blood-soaked cloths scattered by
the bed.

“She bled again just now, and I couldn’t stop it,” Dory said. Tears ran out of
her eyes and down her cheeks. Her face hardly changed.

“Oh child, oh lamb,” said Rush, taking her into her embrace;  but though she
hugged Rush, Dory did not bend.

“She’s going there, to the wall, and I can’t go with her,” she said. “She’s
going alone and I can’t go with her- Can’t you go there?” She broke away
from Rush, looking again at Tern. “You can go there!”

“No,” he said. “I don’t know the way.”

Yet as Dory spoke he saw what the girl saw: a long hill going down into
darkness, and across it, on the edge of twilight, a low wall of stones. And as
he looked he thought he saw a woman walking along beside the wall, very
thin, insubstantial, bone, shadow.  But she was not the dying woman in the
bed. She was Anieb.

Then that was gone and he stood facing the witch-girl. Her look of accusation
slowly changed. She put her face in her hands.

“We have to let them go,” he said.
She said, “I know.”

Rush glanced from one to the other with her keen, bright eyes. “Not only a
handy man,” she said, “but a crafty man. Well, you’re not the first.”

He looked his question.

“This is called Ath’s House,” she said.

“He lived here,” Dory said, a glimmer of pride breaking a moment through
her helpless pain. “The Mage Ath. Long ago. Before he went into the west.


All my foremothers were wise women. He stayed here. With them.”
“Give me a basin,” Rush said. “I’11 get water to soak these.”

“I’ll get the water,” Tern said. He took the basin and went out to the
courtyard, to the well. Just as before, Crow was sitting on the coping, bored
and restless.

“Why are we wasting time here?” he demanded, as Tern let the bucket down
into the well. “Are you fetching and carrying for witches now?”

“Yes,” Tern said, “and I will till she dies. And then I’ll take her daughter to
Roke. And if you want to read the Book of  Names, you can come with us.”

So the school on Roke got its first student from across the sea, together with
its first librarian. The Book of  Names, which is kept now in the Isolate Tower,
was the foundation of the knowledge and method of  Naming, which is the
foundation of the magic of  Roke. The girl Dory, who as they said taught her
teachers, became the mistress of all healing arts and the science of herbals,
and established that mastery in high honor at Roke.

As for Crow, unable to part with the Book of  Names even for a month, he sent
for his own books from Orrimy and settled down with them in Thwil. He
allowed people of the school to study them, so long as they showed them, and
him, due respect.

So the pattern of the years was set for Tern. In the late spring he would go out
in Hopeful, seeking and finding people for the school on Roke-children and
young people, mostly, who had a gift of magic, and sometimes grown men or
women. Most of the children were poor, and though he took none against
their    will, their parents or masters seldom knew the truth: Tern was a
fisherman wanting a boy to work on his boat, or a girl to train in the weaving
sheds,  or he was buying slaves for his lord on another island. If they sent a

child with him to give it opportunity, or sold a child out of  poverty to work 
for
him, he paid them in true ivory; if they sold a child to him as a slave, he paid
them in gold, and was gone by the next day, when the gold turned back into
cow dung.

He traveled far in the Archipelago, even out into the East Reach. He never
went to the same town or island twice without years between, letting his trail
grow cold. Even so he began to be spoken of. The Child Taker, they called
him,  a dreaded sorcerer who carried children to his island in the icy north and
there sucked their blood. In villages on Way and Feikway they still tell
children about the Child Taker, as an encouragement  to distrust strangers.

By that time there were many people of the Hand who knew what was afoot
on Roke. Young people came there sent by them. Men and women came to be


taught and to teach. Many of these had a hard time getting there, for the spells
that hid the island were stronger than ever, making it seem only a cloud, or a
reef among the breakers; and the Roke wind blew, which kept any ship from
Thwil Bay unless there was a sorcerer aboard who knew how to turn that
wind. Still they came, and as the years went on a larger house was needed for
the school than any in Thwil Town.

In the Archipelago,  men built ships and women built houses, that was the
custom;  but in building a great structure women let men work with them, not
having the miners’ superstitions that kept men out of the mines, or the
shipwrights’ that forbade women to watch a keel laid. So both men and
women          of great power raised the Great House on Roke. Its cornerstone 
was
set    on a hilltop above Thwil Town, near the Grove and looking to the Knoll.
Its walls were built not only of stone and wood, but founded deep on magic
and made strong with spells.

Standing on that hill, Medra had said, “There is a vein of water, just under
where I stand, that will not go dry.” They dug down carefully and came to the
water; they let it leap up into the sunlight; and the first part of the Great
House  they made was its inmost heart, the courtyard of the fountain.

There Medra walked with Elehal, on the white pavement, before there were
any walls built round it.

She had planted a young rowan from the Grove beside the fountain. They
came to be sure it was thriving. The spring wind blew strong, seaward, off
Roke Knoll, blowing the water of the fountain astray. Up on the slope of the
Knoll they could see a little group of people: a circle of young students
learning how to do tricks of illusion from the sorcerer Hega of O; Master
Hand, they called him. The sparkweed,  past flowering, cast its ashes on the
wind. There were streaks of grey in Ember’s hair.

“Off you go, then,” she said, “and leave us to settle this matter of the Rule.”
Her frown was as fierce as ever, but her voice was seldom as harsh as this
when she spoke to him.

“I’ll stay if you want, Elehal.”

“I do want you to stay. But don’t stay! You’re a finder, you have to go find.
It’s only that agreeing on the Way-or the Rule, Waris wants us to call it-is
twice the work of building the House. And causes ten times the quarrels. I
wish I could get away from it! I wish I could just walk with you, like this...
And I wish you wouldn’t go north.”

“Why do we quarrel?” he said rather despondently.

“Because there are more of us! Gather twenty or thirty people of power in a


room, they’ll each seek to have their way. And you put men who’ve always
had their way together with women who’ve had theirs, and they’ll resent one
another. And then, too, there are some true and real divisions among us,
Medra. They must be settled, and they can’t be settled easily. Though a little
goodwill would go a long way.”

“Is it Waris?”

“Waris and several other men. And they are men, and they make that
important beyond anything else. To them, the Old Powers are abominable.
And women’s powers are suspect, because they suppose them all connected
with the Old Powers. As if those Powers were to be controlled or used by any
mortal soul! But they put men where we put the world. And so they hold that
a  true wizard must be a man. And celibate.”

“Ah, that,” Medra said, rueful.

“That indeed. My sister told me last night, she and Ennio and the carpenters
have offered to build them a pan of the House that will be all their own, or
even a separate house, so they can keep themselves  pure.”

“Pure?”

“It’s not my word, it’s Waris’s. But they’ve refused. They want the Rule of
Roke to separate men from women, and they want men to make the decisions
for all. Now what compromise can we make with them? Why did they come
here, if they won’t work with us?”

“We should send away the men who won’t.”

“Away? In anger? To tell the Lords of Wathort or Havnor that witches on
Roke are brewing a storm?”

“I forget-I always forget,” he said, downcast again. “I forget the walls of the
prison. I’m not such a fool when I’m outside them... When I’m here I can’t
believe it is a prison. But outside, without you, I remember...  I don’t want to
go, but I have to go. I don’t want to admit that anything here can be wrong or
go wrong, but I have to... I’ll go this time, and I will go north, Elehal. But
when I come back I’ll stay. What I need to find I’ll find here. Haven’t I found
it already?”

“No,” she said, “only me... But there’s a great deal of seeking and finding to
be done in the Grove. Enough to keep even you from being restless. Why
north?”

“To reach out the Hand to Enlad and Ea. I’ve never gone there. We know
nothing about their wizardries. Enlad of the Kings, and bright Ea, eldest of
isles! Surely we’ll find allies there”


“But Havnor lies between us,” she said.

“I won’t sail my boat across Havnor, dear love. I plan to go around it. By
water.” He could always make her laugh; he was the only one who could.
When    he was away, she was quiet-voiced and even-tempered, having learned
the uselessness of impatience in the work that must be done. Sometimes  she
still scowled, sometimes she smiled, but she did not laugh. When she could,
she went to the Grove alone, as she had always done. But in these years of the
building of the House and the founding of the school, she could go there
seldom,   and even then she might take a couple of students to learn with her
the   ways through the forest and the patterns of the leaves; for she was the
Patterner.

Tern left late that year on his journey. He had with him a boy of fifteen, Mote,
a promising weatherworker who needed training at sea, and Sava, a woman of
sixty who had come to Roke with him seven or eight years before. Sava had
been one of the women of the Hand on the isle of Ark. Though she had no
wizardly gifts at all, she knew so well how to get a group of people to trust
one another and work together that she was honored as a wise woman on Ark,
and now on Roke. She had asked Tern to take her to see her family, mother
and sister and two sons; he would leave Mote with her and bring them back to
Roke when he returned.  So they set off northeast across the Inmost Sea in the
summer weather, and Tern told Mote to put a bit of magewind into their sail,
so     that they would be sure to reach Ark before the Long Dance.

As they coasted that island, he himself put an illusion about Hopeful, so that
she would seem not a boat but a drifting log; for pirates and Losen’s slave
takers were thick in these waters.

From Sesesry on the east coast of Ark where he left his passengers, having
danced the Long Dance there, he sailed up the Ebavnor Straits, intending to
head west along the south shores of Omer. He kept the illusion spell about his
boat. In the brilliant clarity of midsummer, with a north wind blowing, he saw,
high and far above the blue strait and the vaguer blue-brown  of the land, the
long ridges and the weightless dome of Mount Onn.

Look, Medra. Look!

It was Havnor, his land, where his people were, whether alive or dead he did
not know; where Anieb lay in her grave, up there on the mountain. He had
never been back, never come this close. It had been how long? Sixteen years,
seventeen years. Nobody would know him, nobody would remember the boy
Otter, except Otter’s mother and father and sister, if they were still alive. 
And
surely there were people of the Hand in the Great Port. Though he had not
known of them as a boy, he should know them now.


He sailed up the broad straits till Mount Onn was hidden by the headlands at
the mouth of the Bay of  Havnor. He would not see it again unless he went
through that narrow passage. Then he would see the mountain, all the sweep
and cresting of it, over the calm waters where he used to try to raise up the
magewind when he was twelve; and sailing on he would see the towers rise
up       from the water, dim at first, mere dots and lines, then lifting up 
their bright
banners, the white city at the center of the world.

It was mere cowardice to keep from Havnor, now-fear for his skin, fear lest he
find his people had died, fear lest he recall Anieb too vividly.

For there had been times when he felt that, as he had summoned her living, so
dead she might summon him. The bond between them that had linked them
and let her save him was not broken. Many times she had come into his
dreams, standing silent as she stood when he first saw her in the reeking tower
at Samory. And he had seen her, years ago, in the vision of the dying healer in
Telio, in the twilight, beside the wall of stones.

He knew now, from Elehal and others on Roke, what that wall was. It lay
between the living and the dead. And in that vision, Anieb had walked on this
side  of it, not on the side that went down into the dark.

Did he fear her, who had freed him?

He tacked across the strong wind, swung round South Point, and sailed into
the Great Bay of Havnor.

Banners still flew from the towers of the City of Havnor, and a king still ruled
there; the banners were those of captured towns and isles, and the king was
the warlord Losen. Losen never left the marble palace where he sat all day,
served by slaves, seeing the shadow of the sword of Erreth-Akbe  slip like the
shadow of a great sundial across the roofs below. He gave orders, and the
slaves said, “It is done, your majesty.” He held audiences, and old men came
and said, “We obey, your majesty.” He summoned his wizards, and the mage
Early came, bowing low. “Make me walk!” Losen shouted, beating his
paralyzed legs with his weak hands.

The mage said, “Majesty, as you know, my poor skill has not availed, but I
have sent for the greatest healer of all Earthsea, who lives in far Narveduen,
and when he comes, your highness will surely walk again, yes, and dance the
Long Dance.”

Then Losen cursed and cried, and his slaves brought him wine, and the mage
went out, bowing, and checking as he went to be sure that the spell of
paralysis was holding.

It was far more convenient to him that Losen should be king than that he


himself should rule Havnor openly. Men of arms didn’t trust men of craft and
didn’t like to serve them. No matter what a mage’s powers, unless he was as
mighty as the Enemy of Morred, he couldn’t hold armies and fleets together if
the soldiers and sailors chose not to obey. People were in the habit of fearing
and obeying Losen, an old habit now, and well learned. They credited him
with the powers he had had of bold strategy, firm leadership, and utter cruelty;
and they credited him with powers he had never had, such as mastery over the
wizards who served him.

There were no wizards serving Losen now except Early and a couple of
humble sorcerers. Early had driven off or killed, one after another, his rivals
for Losen’s favor, and had enjoyed sole rule over all Havnor now for years.

When he was Gelluk’s prentice and assistant, he had encouraged his master in
the study of the lore of Way, finding himself free while Gelluk was off doting
on his quicksilver.  But Gelluk’s abrupt fate had shaken him. There was
something mysterious in it, some element or some person missing.

Summoning  the useful Hound to help him, Early had made a very thorough
inquiry into what happened. Where Gelluk was, of course, was no mystery.
Hound had tracked him straight to a scar in a hillside, and said he was buried
deep under there. Early had no wish to exhume him. But the boy who had
been with him, Hound could not track: could not say whether he was under
that hill with Gelluk, or had got clean away. He had left no spell traces as the
mage did, said Hound, and it had rained very hard all the night after, and
when Hound thought he had found the boy’s tracks, they were a woman’s;
and she was dead.

Early did not punish Hound for his failure, but he remembered it. He was not
used to failures and did not like them. He did not like what Hound told him
about this boy, Otter, and he remembered it.

The desire for power feeds off itself, growing as it devours. Early suffered
from hunger. He starved. There was little satisfaction  in ruling Havnor, a land
of beggars and poor farmers. What was the good of possessing the Throne of
Maharion if nobody sat in it but a drunken cripple? What glory was there in
the palaces of the city when nobody lived in them but crawling slaves? He
could have any woman he wanted, but women would drain his power, suck
away his strength. He wanted no woman near him. He craved an enemy: an
opponent worth destroying.

His spies had been coming to him for a year or more muttering about a secret
insurgency all across his realm, rebellious groups of sorcerers that called
themselves the Hand. Eager to find his enemy, he had one such group
investigated. They turned out to be a lot of old women, midwives,  carpenters,
a ditchdigger,  a tinsmith’s prentice, a couple of little boys. Humiliated and


enraged, Early had them put to death along with the man who reported them
to him. It was a public execution, in Losen’s name, for the crime of
conspiracy against the King. There had perhaps not been enough of that kind
of intimidation lately. But it went against his grain. He didn’t like to make a
public spectacle of fools who had tricked him into fearing them. He would
rather have dealt with them in his own way, in his own time. To be
nourishing,  fear must be immediate; he needed to see people afraid of him,
hear      their terror, smell it, taste it. But since he ruled in Losen’s name, 
it was
Losen who must be feared by the armies and the peoples, and he himself  must
keep in the background, making do with slaves and prentices.

Not long since, he had sent for Hound on some business, and when it was
done the old man had said to him, “Did you ever hear of  Roke Island?”

“South and west of  Kamery. The Lord of Wathort’s owned it for forty or fifty
years.”

Though he seldom left the city, Early prided himself  on his knowledge of all
the Archipelago, gleaned from his sailors’ reports and the marvelous ancient
charts kept in the palace. He studied them nights, brooding on where and how
he might extend his empire.

Hound nodded, as if its location was all that had interested him in Roke.
“Well?”

“One of the old women you had tortured before they burned the lot, you
know? Well, the fellow who did it told me. She talked about her son on Roke.
Calling out to him to come, you know. But like as if he had the power to.”

“Well?”

“Seemed odd. Old woman from a village inland, never seen the sea, calling
the name of an island away off like that.”

“The son was a fisherman who talked about his travels.”
Early waved his hand. Hound sniffed, nodded, and left.

Early never disregarded any triviality Hound mentioned, because so many of
them had proved not to be trivial. He disliked the old man for that, and
because he was unshakable. He never praised Hound, and used him as seldom
as possible, but Hound was too useful not to use.

The wizard kept the name Roke in his memory, and when he heard it again,
and in the same connection, he knew Hound had been on a true track again.

Three children, two boys of fifteen or sixteen and a girl of twelve, were taken
by one of Losen’s patrols south of Omer, running a stolen fishing boat with


the magewind. The patrol caught them only because it had a weatherworker

of its own aboard, who raised a wave to swamp the stolen boat. Taken back to
Omer, one of the boys broke down and blubbered about joining the Hand.

Hearing that word, the men told them they would be tortured and burned, at
which the boy cried that if they spared him he would tell them all about the
Hand, and Roke, and the great mages of Roke.

“Bring them here,” Early said to the messenger.
“The girl flew away, lord,” the man said unwillingly.
“Flew away?”

“She took bird form. Osprey, they said. Didn’t expect that from a girl so
young. Gone before they knew it.”

“Bring the boys, then,” Early said with deadly patience.

They brought him one boy. The other had jumped from the ship, crossing
Havnor Bay, and been killed by a crossbow quarrel. The boy they brought
was       in such a paroxysm of terror that even Early was disgusted by him. How
could he frighten a creature already blind and beshatten with fear? He set a
binding spell on the boy that held him upright and immobile as a stone statue,
and left him so for a night and a day. Now and then he talked to the statue,
telling it that it was a clever lad and might make a good prentice, here in the
palace. Maybe he could go to Roke after all, for Early was thinking of going
to Roke, to meet with the mages there.

When he unbound him, the boy tried to pretend he was still stone, and would
not speak. Early had to go into his mind, in the way he had learned from
Gelluk long ago, when Gelluk was a true master of his art. He found out what
he could. Then the boy was no good for anything and had to be disposed of. It
was humiliating, again, to be outwitted by the very stupidity of these people;
and all he had learned about Roke was that the Hand was there, and a school
where they taught wizardry. And he had learned a man’s name.

The idea of a school for wizards made him laugh. A school for wild boars, he
thought, a college for dragons! But that there was some kind of scheming and
gathering together of men of  power on Roke seemed probable, and the idea of
any league or alliance of wizards appalled him more the more he thought of it.
It was unnatural, and could exist only under great force, the pressure of a
dominant will-the will of a mage strong enough to hold even strong wizards

in his service. There was the enemy he wanted!

Hound was down at the door, they said. Early sent for him to come up.
“Who’s Tern?” he asked as soon as he saw the old man.


With age Hound had come to look his name, wrinkled, with a long nose and
sad eyes. He sniffed and seemed about to say he did not know, but he knew
better than to try to lie to Early. He sighed. “Otter,” he said. “Him that 
killed
old Whiteface.”

“Where’s he hiding?”

“Not hiding at all. Went about the city, talking to people. Went to see his
mother in Endlane, round the mountain. He’s there now.”

“You should have told me at once,” Early said.

“Didn’t know you were after him. I’ve been after him a long time. He fooled
me.” Hound spoke without rancor.

“He tricked and killed a great mage, my master. He’s dangerous. I want
vengeance. Who did he talk to here? I want them. Then I’ll see to him.”

“Some old women down by the docks. An old sorcerer. His sister.”
“Get them here. Take my men.”

Hound sniffed, sighed, nodded.

There was not much to be got from the people his men brought to him. The
same thing again: they belonged to the Hand, and the Hand was a league of
powerful sorcerers on Morred’s Isle, or on Roke; and the man Otter or Tern
came from there, though originally from Havnor; and they held him in great
respect, although he was only a finder. The sister had vanished,  perhaps gone
with Otter to Endlane, where the mother lived. Early rummaged in their
cloudy, witless minds, had the youngest of them tortured, and then burned
them where Losen could sit at his window and watch. The King needed some
diversions.

All this took only two days, and all the time Early was looking and probing
toward Endlane village, sending Hound there before him, sending his own
presentment there to watch. When he knew where the man was he betook
himself  there very quickly, on eagle’s wings; for Early was a great shape-
changer, so fearless that he would take even dragon form.

He knew it was well to use caution with this man. Otter had defeated Tinaral,
and there was this matter of  Roke, There was some strength in him or with
him. Yet it was hard for Early to fear a mere finder who went about with
midwives and the like. He could not bring himself  to sneak and skulk. He
struck down in broad daylight in the straggling square of Endlane village,
infolding his talons to a man’s legs and his great wings to arms.

A child ran bawling to its mammy. No one else was about. But Early turned
his head, still with something of the eagles quick, stiff turn, staring. Wizard


knows wizard, and he knew which house his prey was in. He walked to it and
flung the door open.

A slight, brown man sitting at the table looked up at him.

Early raised his hand to lay the binding spell on him. His hand was stayed,
held immobile half lifted at his side.

This was a contest, then, a foe worth fighting! Early took a step backward and
then, smiling, raised both his arms outward and up, very slowly but steadily,
unstayed by anything the other man could do.

The house vanished. No walls, no roof, nobody. Early stood on the dust of the
village square in the sunshine of morning with his arms in the air.

It was only illusion, of course, but it checked him a moment in his spell, and
then he had to undo the illusion, bringing back the door frame around him, the
walls and roof  beams, the gleam of light on crockery, the hearth stones, the
table. But nobody sat at the table. His enemy was gone.

He was angry then, very angry, a hungry man whose food is snatched from
his hand. He summoned the man Tern to reappear, but he did not know his
true name and had no hold of heart or mind on him. The summons went
unanswered.

He strode from the house, turned, and set a fire spell on it so that it burst 
into
flames, thatch and walls and every window spouting fire. Women ran out of it
screaming. They had been hiding no doubt in the back room; he paid them no
attention. “Hound,” he thought. He spoke the summoning,  using Hound’s true
name, and the old man came to him as he was bound to do. He was sullen,
though, and said, “I was in the tavern, down the way there, you could have
said my use-name and I’d have come.”

Early looked at him once. Hound’s mouth snapped shut and stayed shut.
“Speak when I let you,” the wizard said. “Where is the man?”

Hound nodded northeastwards.
“What’s there?”

Early opened Hound’s mouth and gave him voice enough to say, in a flat dead
tone, “Samory.”

“What form is he in?”
“Otter,” said the flat voice.

Early laughed. “I’ll be waiting for him,” he said; his man’s legs turned to
yellow talons, his arms to wide feathered wings, and the eagle flew up and off


across the wind.

Hound sniffed, sighed, and followed, trudging along unwillingly,  while
behind him in the village the flames died down, and children cried, and
women shouted curses after the eagle.

The danger in trying to do good is that the mind comes to confuse the intent
of  goodness with the act of doing things well.

That is not what the otter was thinking as it swam fast down the Yennava. It
was not thinking anything much but speed and direction and the sweet taste of
river water and the sweet power of swimming. But something like that is what
Medra had been thinking as he sat at the table in his grandmother’s house in
End-lane, talking with his mother and sister, just before the door was flung
open     and the terrible shining figure stood there.

Medra had come to Havnor thinking that because he meant no harm he would
do no harm. He had done irreparable harm. Men and women and children had
died because he was there. They had died in torment, burned alive. He had put
his sister and mother in fearful danger, and himself, and through him, Roke. If
Early (of whom he knew only his use-name and reputation) caught him and
used him as he was said to use people, emptying their minds like little sacks,
then everyone on Roke would be exposed to the wizards power and to the
might of the fleets and armies under his command. Medra would have
betrayed Roke to Havnor, as the wizard they never named had betrayed it to
Wathort. Maybe that man, too, had thought he could do no harm.

Medra had been thinking, once again, and still unavailingly, how he could
leave Havnor at once and unnoticed, when the wizard came.

Now, as otter, he was thinking only that he would like to stay otter, be otter, 
in
the sweet brown water, the living river, forever. There is no death for an 
otter,
only life to the end. But in the sleek creature was the mortal mind; and where
the stream passes the hill west of Samory, the otter came up on the muddy
bank, and then the man crouched there, shivering.

Where to now? Why had he come here?

He had not thought. He had taken the shape that came soonest to him, run to
the river as an otter would, swum as the otter would swim. But only in his
own form could he think as a man, hide, decide, act as a man or as a wizard
against the wizard who hunted him.

He knew he was no match for Early. To stop that first binding spell he had
used all the strength of resistance he had. The illusion and the shape-change
were all the tricks he had to play. If he faced the wizard again he would be
destroyed. And Roke with him. Roke and its children, and Elehal his love,


and Veil, Crow, Dory, all of them, the fountain in the white courtyard, the tree
by the fountain. Only the Grove would stand. Only the green hill, silent,
immovable. He heard Elehal say to him, Havnor lies between us. He heard
her          say, Al! the true powers, all the old powers, at root are one.

He looked up. The hillside above the stream was that same hill where he had
come that day with Tinaral, Anieb’s presence within him. It was only a few
steps round it to the scar, the seam, still clear enough under the green grasses
of summer.

“Mother,”  he said, on his knees there, “Mother, open to me.”

He laid his hands on the seam of eanh, but there was no power in them.

“Let me in, mother,” he whispered in the tongue that was as old as the hill.
The ground shivered a little and opened.

He heard an eagle scream. He got to his feet. He leapt into the dark.

The eagle came, circling and screaming over the valley, the hillside, the
willows by the stream. It circled, searching and searching, and flew back as it
had come.

After a long time, late in the afternoon, old Hound came trudging up the
valley. He stopped now and then and sniffed. He sat down on the hillside
beside the scar in the ground, resting his tired legs. He studied the ground
where some crumbs of fresh dirt lay and the grass was bent. He stroked the
bent grass to straighten it. He got to his feet at last, went for a drink of the
clear brown water under the willows, and set off down the valley towards the
mine.

Medra woke in pain, in darkness. For a long time that was all there was. The
pain came and went, the darkness remained. Once it lightened a little into a
twilight in which he could dimly see. He saw a slope running down from
where    he lay towards a wall of stones, across which was darkness again. But
he could not get up to walk to the wall, and presently the pain came back very
sharp in his arm and hip and head. Then the darkness came around him, and
then nothing.

Thirst: and with it pain. Thirst, and the sound of water running.

He tried to remember how to make light. Anieb said to him, plaintively,
“Can’t you make the light?” But he could not. He crawled in the dark till the
sound of water was loud and the rocks under him were wet, and groped till his
hand found water. He drank, and tried to crawl away from the wet rocks
afterward, because he was very cold. One arm hurt and had no strength in it.

His head hurt again, and he whimpered and shivered, trying to draw himself


together for warmth. There was no warmth and no light.

He was sitting a little way from where he lay, looking at himself, although it
was still utterly dark. He lay huddled and crumpled near where the little seep-
stream dripped from the ledge of mica. Not far away lay another huddled
heap, rotted red silk, long hair, bones. Beyond it the cavern stretched away.

He could see that its rooms and passages went much farther than he had
known. He saw it with the same uncaring interest with which he saw Tinaral’s
body and his own body. He felt a mild regret. It was only fair that he should
die here with the man he had killed. It was right. Nothing was wrong. But
something in him ached, not the sharp body pain, a long ache, lifelong.

“Anieb,” he said.

Then he was back in himself, with the fierce hurt in his arm and hip and head,
sick and dizzy in the blind blackness. When he moved, he whimpered;  but he
sat up. I have to live, he thought. I have to remember how to live. How to
make light. I have to remember. I have to remember the shadows of the
leaves.

How far does the forest go?
As far as the mind goes.

He looked up into the darkness. After a while he moved his good hand a little,
and the faint light flowed out of it.

The roof of the cavern was far above him. The trickle of water dripping from
the mica ledge glittered in shon dashes in the werelight.

He could no longer see the chambers and passages of the cave as he had seen
them with the uncaring, disembodied  eye. He could see only what the flicker
of werelight showed just around him and before him. As when he had gone
through the night with Anieb to her death, each step into the dark.

He got to his knees, and thought then to whisper, “Thank you, mother.” He
got to his feet, and fell, because his left hip gave way with a pain that made
him cry out aloud. After a while he tried again, and stood up. Then he started
forward.

It took him a long time to cross the cavern. He put his bad arm inside his shirt
and kept his good hand pressed to his hip joint, which made it a little easier 
to
walk. The walls narrowed gradually to a passage. Here the roof was much
lower, just above his head. Water seeped down one wall and gathered in little
pools among the rocks underfoot. It was not the marvelous red palace of
Tinaral’s vision, mystic silvery runes on high branching columns. It was only
the earth, only dirt, rock, water. The air was cool and still. Away from the


dripping of the stream it was silent. Outside the gleam of werelight it was
dark.

Medra bowed his head, standing there. “Anieb,” he said, “can you come back
this far? I don’t know the way.” He waited a while. He saw darkness, heard
silence. Slow and halting, he entered the passage.

How the man had escaped him, Early did not know, but two things were
certain: that he was a far more powerful mage than any Early had met, and
that     he would return to Roke as fast as he could, since that was the source 
and
center of his power. There was no use trying to get there before him; he had
the lead. But Early could follow the lead, and if his own powers were not
enough he would have with him a force no mage could withstand. Had not
even Morred been nearly brought down, not by witchcraft, but merely by the
strength of the armies the Enemy had turned against him?

“Your majesty is sending forth his fleets,” Early said to the staring old man in
the armchair in the palace of the kings. “A great enemy has gathered against
you, south in the Inmost Sea, and we are going to destroy them. A hundred
ships will sail from the Great Port, from Omer and South Pon and your
fiefdom on Hosk, the greatest navy the world has seen! I shall lead them. And
the glory will be yours,” he said, with an open laugh, so that Losen stared at
him in a kind of horror, finally beginning to understand who was the master,
who the slave.

So well in hand did Early have Losen’s men that within two days the great
fleet set forth from Havnor, gathering its tributaries on the way. Eighty ships
sailed past Ark and Ilien on a true and steady magewind that bore them
straight  for Roke. Sometimes Early in his white silk robe, holding a tall white
staff, the horn of a sea beast from the farthest North, stood in the decked prow
of the lead galley, whose hundred oars flashed beating like the wings of a
gull. Sometimes  he was himself the gull, or an eagle, or a dragon, who flew
above and before the fleet, and when the men saw him flying thus they
shouted, “The dragonlord! the dragonlord!”

They came ashore in Ilien for water and food. Setting a host of many
hundreds of men on its way so quickly had left little time for provisioning  the
ships. They overran the towns along the west shore of Ilien, taking what they
wanted, and did the same on Vissti and Kamery, looting what they could and
burning what they left. Then the great fleet turned west, heading for the one
harbor of Roke Island, the Bay of Thwil. Early knew of the harbor from the
maps  in Havnor, and knew there was a high hill above it. As they came
nearer,   he took dragon form and soared up high above his ships, leading them,
gazing into the west for the sight of that hill.


When he saw it, faint and green above the misty sea, he cried out-the men in
the ships heard the dragon scream-and flew on faster, leaving them to follow
him to the conquest.

All the rumors of Roke had said that it was spell-defended and charm-hidden,
invisible to ordinary eyes. If there were any spells woven about that hill or 
the
bay  he now saw opening before it, they were gossamer to him, transparent.

Nothing blurred his eyes or challenged his will as he flew over the bay, over
the little town and a half-finished building on the slope above it, to the top 
of
the high green hill. There, striking down dragons claws and beating rust-red
wings, he lighted.

He stood in his own form. He had not made the change himself. He stood
alert, uncertain.

The wind blew, the long grass nodded in the wind. Summer was getting on
and the grass was dry now, yellowing, no flowers in it but the little white
heads of the lacefoam. A woman came walking up the hill towards him
through the long grass. She followed no path, and walked easily, without
haste.

He thought he had raised his hand in a spell to stop her, but he had not raised
his hand, and she came on. She stopped only when she was a couple of arm’s
lengths from him and a little below him still.

“Tell me your name,” she said, and he said, “Teriel,”
“Why did you come here, Teriel?”

“To destroy you.”

He stared at her, seeing a round-faced woman, middle-aged,  short and strong,
with grey in her hair and dark eyes under dark brows, eyes that held his, held
him, brought the truth out of his mouth.

“Destroy us? Destroy this hill? The trees there?” She looked down to a grove
of trees not far from the hill. “Maybe Segoy who made them could unmake
them. Maybe the earth will destroy herself. Maybe she’ll destroy herself
through our hands, in the end. But not through yours. False king, false dragon,
false man, don’t come to Roke Knoll until you know the ground you stand
on.” She made one gesture of her hand, downward to the earth.

Then she turned and went down the hill through the long grass, the way she
had come.

There were other people on the hill, he saw now, many others, men and
women, children, living and spirits of the dead; many, many of them. He was
terrified of them and cowered, trying to make a spell that would hide him


from them all.

But he made no spell. He had no magic left in him. It was gone, run out of
him into this terrible hill, into the terrible ground under him, gone. He was no
wizard, only a man like the others, powerless.

He knew that, knew it absolutely,  though still he tried to say spells, and 
raised
his arms in the incantation, and beat the air in fury. Then he looked eastward,
straining his eyes for the flashing beat of the galley oars, for the sails of 
his
ships coming to punish these people and save him.

All he saw was a mist on the water, all across the sea beyond the mouth of the
bay. As he watched it thickened and darkened, creeping out over the slow
waves.

Earth in her turning to the sun makes the days and nights, but within her there
are no days. Medra walked through the night. He was very lame, and could
not always keep up the werelight. When it failed he had to stop and sit down
and sleep. The sleep was never death, as he thought it was. He woke, always
cold, always in pain, always thirsty, and when he could make a glimmer of the
light he got to his feet and went on. He never saw Anieb but he knew she was
there. He followed her. Sometimes there were great rooms. Sometimes there
were pools of motionless water. It was hard to break the stillness of their
surface, but he drank from them. He thought he had gone down deeper and
deeper for a long time, till he reached the longest of those pools, and after 
that
the way went up again. Sometimes now Anieb followed him. He could say
her name, though she did not answer. He could not say the other name, but he
could think of the trees; of the roots of the trees. This was the kingdom of the
roots of the trees. How far does the forest go? As far as forests go. As long as
the lives, as deep as the roots of the trees. As long as leaves cast shadows.

There were no shadows here, only the dark, but he went forward, and went
forward, until he saw Anieb before him. He saw the flash of her eyes, the
cloud of her curling hair. She looked back at him for a moment, and then
turned aside and ran lightly down a long, steep slope into darkness.

Where he stood it was not wholly dark. The air moved against his face. Far
ahead, dim, small, there was a light that was not werelight. He went forward.
He had been crawling for a long time now, dragging the right leg, which
would not bear his weight. He went forward. He smelled the wind of evening
and saw the sky of evening through the branches and leaves of trees. An
arched oak root formed the mouth of the cave, no bigger than a man or a
badger needed to crawl through. He crawled through. He lay there under the
root of the tree, seeing the light fade and a star or two come out among the
leaves.


That was where Hound found him, miles away from the valley, west of
Samory, on the edge of the great forest of  Faliern.

“Got you,” the old man said, looking down at the muddy, lax body. He added,
“Too late,” regretfully. He stooped to see if he could pick him up or drag him,
and felt the faint warmth of life. “You’re tough,” he said. “Here, wake up.

Come on. Otter, wake up.”

He recognized Hound, though he could not sit up and could barely speak. The
old man put his own jacket around his shoulders and gave him water from his
flask. Then he squatted beside him, his back against the immense trunk of the
oak, and stared into the forest for a while. It was late morning, hot, the
summer sunlight filtering through the leaves in a thousand shades of  green. A
squirrel scolded, far up in the oak, and a jay replied. Hound scratched his neck
and sighed.

“The wizards off on the wrong track, as usual,” he said at last. “Said you’d
gone to Roke Island and he’d catch you there. I said nothing.”

He looked at the man he knew only as Otter.

“You went in there, that hole, with the old wizard, didn’t you? Did you find
him?”

Medra nodded.

“Hmn,” Hound went, a short, grunting laugh. “You find what you look for,
don’t you? Like me.” He saw that his companion was in distress, and said,
“I’ll get you out of here. Fetch a carter from the village down there, when I’ve
got my breath. Listen. Don’t fret. I haven’t hunted you all these years to give
you to Early. The way I gave you to Gelluk. I was sorry for that. I thought
about it. What I said to you about men of a craft sticking together. And who
we work for. Couldn’t see that I had much choice about that. But having done
you a disfavor, I thought if I came across you again I’d do you a favor, if I
could. As one finder to the other, see?”

Otter’s breath was coming hard. Hound put his hand on Otter’s hand for a
moment, said, “Don’t worry,” and got to his feet. “Rest easy,” he said.

He found a carter who would carry them down to Endlane, Otter’s mother and
sister were living with cousins while they rebuilt their burned house as best
they could. They welcomed him with disbelieving  joy. Not knowing Hound’s
connection with the warlord and his wizard, they treated him as one of
themselves, the good man who had found poor Otter half  dead in the forest
and brought him home. A wise man, said Otter’s mother Rose, surely a wise
man. Nothing was too good for such a man.


Otter was slow to recover, to heal. The bonesetter did what he could about his
broken arm and his damaged hip, the wise woman salved the cuts from the
rocks on his hands and head and knees, his mother brought him all the
delicacies she could find in the gardens and berry thickets; but he lay as weak
and wasted as when Hound first brought him. There was no heart in him, the
wise woman of Endlane said. It was somewhere else, being eaten up with
worry or fear or shame.

“So where is it?” Hound said.

Otter, after a long silence, said, “Roke Island.”

“Where old Early went with the great fleet. I see. Friends there. Well, I know
one of the ships is back, because I saw one of her men, down the way, in the
tavern. I’ll go ask about. Find out if they got to Roke and what happened
there. What I can tell you is that it seems old Early is late coming home. Hmn,
hmn,” he went, pleased with his joke. “Late coming home,” he repeated, and
got up. He looked at Otter, who was not much to look at. “Rest easy,” he said,
and went off.

He was gone several days. When he returned, riding in a horse-drawn cart, he
had such a look about him that Otter’s sister hurried in to tell him, “Hound’s
won a battle or a fortune! He’s riding behind a city horse, in a city cart, 
like a
prince!”

Hound came in on her heels. “Well,” he said, “in the first place, when I got to
the city, I go up to the palace, just to hear the news, and what do I see? I see
old King Pirate standing on his legs, shouting out orders like he used to do.

Standing up! Hasn’t stood for years. Shouting orders! And some of em did
what he said, and some of em didn’t. So I got on out of there, that kind of a
situation being dangerous, in a palace. Then I went about to friends of mine
and asked where was old Early and had the fleet been to Roke and come back
and all. Early, they said, nobody knew about Early. Not a sign of him nor
from him. Maybe I could find him, they said, joking me, hmn. They know I
love him. As for the ships, some had come back, with the men aboard saying
they never came to Roke Island, never saw it, sailed right through where the
sea charts said was an island, and there was no island. Then there were some

men from one of the great galleys. They said when they got close to where the
island should be, they came into a fog as thick as wet cloth, and the sea turned
thick too, so that the oarsmen could barely push the oars through it, and they
were caught in that for a day and a night. When they got out, there wasn’t
another ship of all the fleet on the sea, and the slaves were near rebelling, so
the master brought her home as quick as he could. Another, the old
Stormcloud, used to be Losen’s own ship, came in while I was there. I talked
to some men off her. They said there was nothing but fog and reefs all round


where Roke was supposed to be, so they sailed on with seven other ships,
south a ways, and met up with a fleet sailing up from Wathort. Maybe the
lords there had heard there was a great fleet coming raiding, because they
didn’t stop to ask questions, but sent wizard’s fire at our ships, and came
alongside to board them if they could, and the men I talked to said it was a
hard fight just to get away from them, and not all did. All this time they had
no word from Early, and no weather was worked for them unless they had a
bagman of their own aboard. So they came back up the length of the Inmost
Sea, said the man from Stormcloud, one straggling after the other like the
dogs that lost the dogfight. Now, do you like the news I bring you?”

Otter had been struggling with tears; he hid his face. “Yes,” he said, 
“thanks.”

“Thought you might. As for King Losen,” Hound said, “who knows.” He
sniffed and sighed. “If I was him I’d retire” he said. “I think I’ll do that
myself.”

Otter had got control of his face and voice. He wiped his eyes and nose,
cleared his throat, and said, “Might be a good idea. Come to Roke. Safer.”

“Seems to be a hard place to find,” Hound said.
“I can find it,” said Otter.

IV.            Medra

There was an old man by our door
Who opened it to rich or poor,

Many came there both small and great,
But few could pass through Medra’s Gate.
So runs the water away, away,

So runs the water away.

HOUND STAYED IN ENDLANE. He could make a living as a finder there,
and he liked the tavern, and Otter’s mother’s hospitality.

By the beginning of autumn, Losen was hanging by a rope round his feet from
a window of the New Palace, rotting, while six warlords quarreled over his
kingdom, and the ships of the great fleet chased and fought one another across
the Straits and the wizard-troubled sea.


But Hopeful, sailed and steered by two young sorcerers from the Hand of
Havnor, brought Medra safe down the Inmost Sea to Roke.

Ember was on the dock to meet him. Lame and very thin, he came to her and
took her hands, but he could not lift his face to hers. He said, “I have too
many deaths on my hean, Elehal.”

“Come with me to the Grove,” she said.

They went there together and stayed till the winter came. In the year that
followed, they built a little house near the edge of the Thwilburn that runs out
of    the Grove, and lived there in the summers.

They worked and taught in the Great House. They saw it go up stone on
stone, every stone steeped in spells of  protection, endurance, peace. They saw
the Rule of  Roke established, though never so firmly as they might wish, and
always against opposition; for mages came from other islands and rose up
from among the students of the school, women and men of  power,
knowledge, and pride, sworn by the Rule to work together and for the good of
all,      but each seeing a different way to do it.

Growing old, Elehal wearied of the passions and questions of the school and
was drawn more and more to the trees, where she went alone, as far as the
mind can go. Medra walked there too, but not so far as she, for he was lame.

After she died, he lived a while alone in the small house near the Grove.

One day in autumn he came back to the school. He went in by the garden
door, which gives on the path through the fields to Roke Knoll. It is a curious
thing about the Great House of Roke, that it has no portal or grand entryway
at  all. You can enter by what they call the back door, which, though it is made
of horn and framed in dragons tooth and carved with the Thousand-Leaved
Tree, looks like nothing at all from outside, as you come to it in a dingy 
street;
or you can go in the garden door, plain oak with an iron bolt. But there is no
front door.

He came through the halls and stone corridors to the inmost place, the marble-
paved courtyard of the fountain, where the tree Elehal had planted now stood
tall, its berries reddening.

Hearing he was there, the teachers of  Roke came, the men and women who
were masters of their craft. Medra had been the Master Finder, until he went
to the Grove. A young woman now taught that art, as he had taught it to her.

“I’ve been thinking,” he said. “There are eight of you. Nine’s a better number.
Count me as a master again, if you will.”

“What will you do, Master Tern?” asked the Summoner, a grey-haired mage


from Ilien.

“I’ll keep the door,” Medra said. “Being lame, I won’t go far from it. Being
old, I’ll know what to say to those who come. Being a finder, I’ll find out if
they belong here.”

“That would spare us much trouble and some danger,” said the young Finder.
“How will you do it?” the Summoner asked.

“I’ll ask them their name,” Medra said. He smiled. “If they’ll tell me, they can
come in. And when they think they’ve learned everything, they can go out
again. If they can tell me my name.”

So it was. For the rest of his life, Medra kept the doors of the Great House on
Roke. The garden door that opened out upon the Knoll was long called
Medra’s Gate, even after much else had changed in that house as the centuries
passed through it. And still the ninth Master of Roke is the Doorkeeper.

In Endlane and the villages round the foot of  Onn on Havnor, women
spinning and weaving sing a riddle song of which the last line has to do,
maybe, with the man who was Medra, and Otter, and Tern.

Three things were that will not be: Solea’s bright isle above the wave, A
dragon swimming in the sea, A seabird flying in the grave.


Darkrose  And Diamond

A BOAT-SONG  FROM WEST HAVNOR

Where my love is going
There will I go.

Where his boat is rowing
I will row.

We will laugh together,
Together we will cry.

If he lives I will live,
If he dies I die.

Where my love is going
There will I go.

Where his boat is rowing
I will row.

In the west of Havnor, among hills forested with oak and chestnut, is the town
of Glade. A while ago, the rich man of that town was a merchant called
Golden.

Golden owned the mill that cut the oak boards for the ships they built in
Havnor South Port and Havnor Great Port; he owned the biggest chestnut
groves;   he owned the carts and hired the carters that carried the timber and 
the
chestnuts over the hills to be sold. He did very well from trees, and when his
son    was born, the mother said, “We could call him Chestnut, or Oak, maybe?”
But the father said, “Diamond,” diamond being in his estimation the one thing
more precious than gold.

So little Diamond grew up in the finest house in Glade, a fat, bright-eyed
baby, a ruddy, cheerful boy. He had a sweet singing voice, a true ear, and a
love   of music, so that his mother, Tuly, called him Songsparrow and Skylark,
among other loving names, for she never really did like “Diamond.” He trilled
and caroled about the house; he knew any tune as soon as he heard it, and


invented tunes when he heard none. His mother had the wisewoman Tangle
teach him The Creation of Ea and The Deed of the Young King, and at
Sunreturn when he was eleven years old he sang the Winter Carol for the
Lord         of the Western Land, who was visiting his domain in the hills above
Glade. The Lord and his Lady praised the boy’s singing and gave him a tiny
gold box with a diamond set in the lid, which seemed a kind and pretty gift to
Diamond and his mother. But Golden was a bit impatient with the singing and
the trinkets. “There are more important things for you to do, son,” he said.
“And greater prizes to be earned.”

Diamond thought his father meant the business—the loggers, the sawyers, the
sawmill, the chestnut groves, the pickers, the carters, the carts—all that work
and talk and planning, complicated, adult matters. He never felt that it had
much to do with him, so how was he to have as much to do with it as his
father expected? Maybe he’d find out when he grew up.

But in fact Golden wasn’t thinking only about the business. He had observed
something about his son that had made him not exactly set his eyes higher
than      the business, but glance above it from time to time, and then shut his
eyes.

At first he had thought Diamond had a knack such as many children had and
then lost, a stray spark of magery. When he was a little boy, Golden himself
had been able to make his own shadow shine and sparkle. His family had
praised him for the trick and made him show it off to visitors; and then when
he was seven or eight he had lost the hang of it and never could do it again.

When he saw Diamond come down the stairs without touching the stairs, he
thought his eyes had deceived him; but a few days later, he saw the child float
up the stairs, just a finger gliding along the oaken banister-rail. “Can you do
that coming down?” Golden asked, and Diamond said,

“Oh, yes, like this,” and sailed back down smooth as a cloud on the south
wind.

“How did you learn to do that?”

“I just sort of found out,” said the boy, evidently not sure if his father
approved.

Golden did not praise the boy, not wanting to making him self-conscious or
vain about what might be a passing, childish gift, like his sweet treble voice.
There was too much fuss already made over that.

But a year or so later he saw Diamond out in the back garden with his
playmate Rose. The children were squatting on their haunches, heads close
together, laughing. Something intense or uncanny about them made him pause


at the window on the stairs landing and watch them. A thing between them
was leaping up and down, a frog? a toad? a big cricket? He went out into the
garden and came up near them, moving so quietly, though he was a big man,
that they in their absorption did not hear him. The thing that was hopping up
and down on the grass between their bare toes was a rock. When Diamond
raised his hand the rock jumped up in the air, and when he shook his hand a
little the rock hovered in the air, and when he flipped his fingers downward it
fell to earth.

“Now you,” Diamond said to Rose, and she staned to do what he had done,
but the rock only twitched a little. “Oh,” she whispered, “there’s your dad.”

“That’s very clever,” Golden said.
“Di thought it up,” Rose said.

Golden did not like the child. She was both outspoken and defensive, both
rash and timid. She was a girl, and a year younger than Diamond, and a
witch’s daughter. He wished his son would play with boys his own age, his
own sort, from the respectable families of  Glade. Tuly insisted on calling the
witch “the wisewoman,”  but a witch was a witch and her daughter was no fit
companion for Diamond. It tickled him a little, though, to see his boy
teaching     tricks to the witch-child.

“What else can you do, Diamond?” he asked.

“Play the flute,” Diamond said promptly, and took out of his pocket the little
fife his mother had given him for his twelfth birthday. He put it to his lips, 
his
fingers danced, and he played a sweet, familiar tune from the western coast,
“Where My Love Is Going.”

“Very nice,” said the father. “But anybody can play the fife, you know.”
Diamond glanced at Rose. The girl turned her head away, looking down.
“I learned it really quickly,” Diamond said.

Golden grunted, unimpressed.

“It can do it by itself,” Diamond said, and held out the fife away from his 
lips.
His fingers danced on the stops, and the fife played a short jig. It hit several
false notes and squealed on the last high note. “I haven’t got it right yet,”
Diamond said, vexed and embarrassed.

“Pretty good, pretty good,” his father said. “Keep practicing.” And he went
on. He was not sure what he ought to have said. He did not want to encourage
the boy to spend any more time on music, or with this girl; he spent too much
already, and neither of them would help him get anywhere in life. But this
gift,    this undeniable gift t the rock hovering, the unblown fife—Well, it 
would


be wrong to make too much of it, but probably it should not be discouraged.

In Golden’s understanding, money was power, but not the only power. There
were two others, one equal, one greater. There was birth. When the Lord of
the Western Land came to his domain near Glade, Golden was glad to show
him fealty. The Lord was born to govern and to keep the peace, as Golden
was born to deal with commerce and wealth, each in his place; and each,
noble or common, if he served well and honestly, deserved honor and respect.
But there were also lesser lords whom Golden could buy and sell, lend to or
let beg, men born noble who deserved neither fealty nor honor. Power of binh
and power of money were contingent, and must be earned lest they be lost.

But beyond the rich and the lordly were those called the Men of Power: the
wizards. Their power, though little exercised, was absolute. In their hands lay
the fate of the long-kingless kingdom of the Archipelago.

If Diamond had been born to that kind of  power, if that was his gift, then all
Golden’s dreams and plans of training him in the business, and having him
help in expanding the carting route to a regular trade with South Port, and
buying up the chestnut forests above Reche—all such plans dwindled into
trifles. Might Diamond go (as his mother’s uncle had gone) to the School of
Wizards on Roke Island? Might he (as that uncle had done) gain glory for his
family and dominion over lord and commoner, becoming a Mage in the Court
of the Lords Regent in the Great Port of Havnor? Golden all but floated up the
stairs himself, borne on such visions.

But he said nothing to the boy and nothing to the boy’s mother. He was a
consciously close-mouthed  man, distrustful of visions until they could be
made acts; and she, though a dutiful, loving wife and mother and
housekeeper,  already made too much of  Diamond’s talents and
accomplishments. Also, like all women, she was inclined to babble and
gossip, and indiscriminate in her friendships. The girl Rose hung about with
Diamond because Tuly encouraged Rose’s mother the witch to visit,
consulting her every time Diamond had a hangnail, and telling her more than
she or anyone ought to know about Golden’s household. His business was
none of the witch’s business. On the other hand, Tangle might be able to tell
him if his son in fact showed promise, had a talent for magery...but he
flinched away from the thought of asking her, asking a witch’s opinion on
anything, least of all a judgment on his son.

He resolved to wait and watch. Being a patient man with a strong will, he did
so for four years, till Diamond was sixteen. A big, well-grown youth, good at
games and lessons, he was ‘still ruddy-faced  and bright-eyed and cheerful. He
had taken it hard when his voice changed, the sweet treble going all untuned
and hoarse. Golden had hoped that that was the end of his singing, but the boy


went on wandering about with itinerant musicians, ballad-singers and such,
learning all their trash. That was no life for a merchant’s son who was to
inherit    and manage his father’s properties and mills and business, and Golden
told him so. “Singing time is over, son,” he said. “You must think about being
a man.”

Diamond had been given his truename at the springs of the Amia in the hills
above Glade. The wizard Hemlock, who had known his great-uncle the Mage,
came up from South Pon to name him. And Hemlock was invited to his
nameday party the year after, a big pany, beer and food for all, and new
clothes,       a shirt or skirt or shift for every child, which was an old 
custom in the
West of Havnor, and dancing on the village green in the warm autumn
evening. Diamond had many friends, all the boys his age in town and all the
girls  too. The young people danced, and some of them had a bit too much
beer, but nobody misbehaved very badly, and it was a merry and memorable
night. The next morning Golden told his son again that he must think about
being  a man.

“I have thought some about it,” said the boy, in his husky voice.
“And?”

“Well, I,” said Diamond, and stuck.

“I’d always counted on your going into the family business,” Golden said. His
tone was neutral, and Diamond said nothing. “Have you had any ideas of
what you want to do?”

“Sometimes.”

“Did you talk at all to Master Hemlock?”

Diamond hesitated and said, “No.” He looked a question at his father.

“I talked to him last night,” Golden said. “He said to me that there are certain
natural gifts which it’s not only difficult but actually wrong, harmful, to
suppress.”

The light had come back into Diamond’s dark eyes.

“The Master said that such gifts or capacities,  untrained, are not only wasted,
but may be dangerous.  The art must be learned, and practiced, he said.”

Diamond’s face shone.

“But, he said, it must be learned and practiced for its own sake.”
Diamond nodded eagerly.

“If it’s a real gift, an unusual capacity, that’s even more true. A witch with 
her


love potions can’t do much harm, but even a village sorcerer, he said, must
take care, for if the art is used for base ends, it becomes weak and 
noxious....

Of course, even a sorcerer gets paid. And wizards, as you know, live with
lords, and have what they wish.”

Diamond was listening intently, frowning a little.

“So, to be blunt about it, if you have this gift, Diamond, it’s of no use,
directly, to our business. It has to be cultivated on its own terms, and kept
under control-learned and mastered. Only then, he said, can your teachers
begin to tell you what to do with it, what good it will do you. Or others,” he
added conscientiously.

There was a long pause.

“I told him,” Golden said, “that I had seen you, with a turn of your hand and a
single word, change a wooden carving of a bird into a bird that flew up and
sang. Pre seen you make a light glow in thin air. You didn’t know I was
watching. I’ve watched and said nothing for a long time. I didn’t want to
make too much of mere childish play. But I believe you have a gift, perhaps a
great gift. When I told Master Hemlock what I’d seen you do, he agreed with
me. He said that you may go study with him in South Pon for a year, or
perhaps longer.”

“Study with Master Hemlock?” said Diamond, his voice up half  an octave.
“If you wish.”

“I, I, I never thought about it. Can I think about it? For a while—a day?”

“Of course,” Golden said, pleased with his son’s caution. He had thought
Diamond might leap at the offer, which would have been natural, perhaps, but
painful to the father, the owl who had—perhaps—hatched out an eagle.

For Golden looked on the Art Magic with genuine humility as something
quite beyond him—not a mere toy, such as music or tale-telling, but a
practical business, which his business could never quite equal. And he was,
though  he wouldn’t have put it that way, afraid of wizards. A bit
contemptuous           of sorcerers, with their sleights and illusions and 
gibble-gabble,
but      afraid of wizards.

“Does Mother know?” Diamond asked.

“She will when the time comes. But she has no part to play in your decision,
Diamond. Women know nothing of these matters and have nothing to do with
them.

You must make your choice alone, as a man. Do you understand that?”
Golden was earnest, seeing his chance to begin to wean the lad from his


mother. She as a woman would cling, but he as a man must learn to let go.
And Diamond nodded sturdily enough to satisfy his father, though he had a
thoughtful look.

“Master Hemlock said I, said he thought I had, I might have a, a gift, a talent
for—?”

Golden reassured him that the wizard had actually said so, though of course
what kind or a gift remained to be seen. The boy’s modesty was a great relief
to him.

He had half-consciously dreaded that Diamond would triumph over him,
asserting his power right away—that  mysterious, dangerous, incalculable
power against which Golden’s wealth and mastery and dignity shrank to
impotence.

“Thank you, Father,” the boy said. Golden embraced him and left, well
pleased with him.

THEIR MEETING PLACE was in the sallows, the willow thickets down by
the Amia as it ran below the smithy. As soon as Rose got there, Diamond
said, “He wants me to go study with Master Hemlock! What am I going to
do?”

“Study with the wizard?”

“He thinks I have this huge great talent. For magic.”
“Who does?”

“Father does. He saw some of the stuff  we were practicing. But he says
Hemlock says I should come study with him because it might be dangerous
not   to. Oh,” and Diamond beat his head with his hands.

“But you do have a talent.”

He groaned and scoured his scalp with his knuckles. He was sitting on the dirt
in their old play-place, a kind of bower deep in the willows, where they could
hear the stream running over the stones nearby and the clang-clang of the
smithy further off. The girl sat down facing him.

“Look at all the stuff  you can do,” she said. “You couldn’t do any of it if you
didn’t have a gift.”

“A little gift,” Diamond said indistinctly. “Enough for tricks.”
“How do you know that?”

Rose was very dark-skinned, with a cloud of crinkled hair, a thin mouth, an
intent, serious face. Her feet and legs and hands were bare and dirty, her 
skirt


and jacket disreputable. Her dirty toes and fingers were delicate and elegant,
and a necklace of amethysts gleamed under the torn, buttonless  jacket. Her
mother, Tangle, made a good living by curing and healing, bone-knitting and
birth-easing, and selling spells of finding, love-potions,  and sleeping-drafts.
She       could afford to dress herself  and her daughter in new clothes, buy 
shoes,
and keep clean, but it didn’t occur to her to do so. Nor was housekeeping  one
of her interests. She and Rose lived mostly on boiled chicken and fried eggs,
as she was often paid in poultry. The yard of their two-room house was a
wilderness of  cats and hens. She liked cats, toads, and jewels. The amethyst
necklace had been payment for the safe delivery of a son to Golden’s head
forester. Tangle herself  wore armfuls of bracelets and bangles that flashed and
crashed when she flicked out an impatient spell. At times she wore a kitten on
her shoulder. She was not an attentive mother. Rose had demanded, at seven
years old, “Why did you have me if you didn’t want me?”

“How can you deliver babies properly if you haven’t had one?” said her
mother.

“So I was practice,” Rose snarled.

“Everything is practice,” Tangle said. She was never ill-natured. She seldom
thought to do anything much for her daughter, but never hurt her, never
scolded  her, and gave her whatever she asked for, dinner, a toad of her own,
the amethyst necklace, lessons in witchcraft. She would have provided new
clothes if Rose had asked for them, but she never did. Rose had looked after
herself  from an early age; and this was one of the reasons Diamond loved her.
With her, he knew what freedom was. Without her, he could attain it only
when he was hearing and singing and playing music.

“I do have a gift,” he said now, rubbing his temples and pulling his hair.
“Stop destroying your head,” Rose told him.

“I know Tarry thinks I do.”

“Of course you do! What does it matter what Tarry thinks? You already play
the harp about nine times better than he ever did.”

This was another of the reasons Diamond loved her.
“Are there any wizard musicians?” he asked, looking up.
She pondered. “I don’t know.”

“I don’t either. Morred and Elfarran sang to each other, and he was a mage. I
think there’s a Master Chanter on Roke, that teaches the lays and the histories.
But I never heard of a wizard being a musician.”

“I don’t see why one couldn’t be.” She never saw why something could not


be.

Another reason he loved her.

“It always seemed to me they’re sort of alike,” he said, “magic and music.
Spells and tunes. For one thing, you have to get them just exactly right.”

“Practice,”  Rose said, rather sourly. “I know.” She flicked a pebble at
Diamond. It turned into a butterfly in midair. He flicked a butterfly back at
her,      and the two flitted and flickered a moment before they fell back to 
earth
as pebbles. Diamond and Rose had worked out several such variations on the
old stone-hopping  trick.

“You ought to go, Di,” she said. “Just to find out.”
“I know.”

“What if you got to be a wizard! Oh! Think of the stuff  you could teach me!
Shapechanging—We could be anything. Horses! Bears!”

“Moles,” Diamond said. “Honestly, I feel like hiding underground. I always
thought Father was going to make me learn all his kind of stuff, after I got my
name. But all this year he’s kept sort of holding off. I guess he had this in
mind   all along. But what if I go down there and I’m not any better at being a
wizard than I am at bookkeeping? Why can’t I do what I know I can do?”

“Well, why can’t you do it all? The magic and the music, anyhow? You can
always hire a bookkeeper.”

When she laughed, her thin face got bright, her thin mouth got wide, and her
eyes disappeared.

“Oh, Darkrose,”  Diamond said, “I love you.”

“Of course you do. You’d better. I’ll witch you if you don’t.”

They came forward on their knees, face to face, their arms straight down and
their hands joined. They kissed each other all over their faces. To Rose’s lips
Diamond’s face was smooth and full as a plum, with just a hint of  prickliness
above   the lip and jawline, where he had taken to shaving recently. To
Diamond’s lips Rose’s face was soft as silk, with just a hint of grittiness on
one     cheek, which she had rubbed with a dirty hand. They moved a little 
closer
so that their breasts and bellies touched, though their hands stayed down by
their sides. They went on kissing.

“Darkrose,”  he breathed in her ear, his secret name for her.

She said nothing, but breathed very warm in his ear, and he moaned. His
hands clenched hers. He drew back a little. She drew back. They sat back on
their ankles.


“Oh Di,” she said, “it will be awful when you go.”

“I won’t go,” he said. “Anywhere. Ever.”

BUT OF COURSE he went down to Havnor South Port, in one of his father’s
carts driven by one of his father’s carters, along with Master Hemlock. As a
rule, people do what wizards advise them to do. And it is no small honor to be
invited by a wizard to be his student or apprentice. Hemlock, who had won
his   staff on Roke, was used to having boys come to him begging to be tested
and, if they had the gift for it, taught. He was a little curious about this boy
whose cheerful good manners hid some reluctance or self-doubt. It was the
father’s idea, not the boy’s, that he was gifted. That was unusual, though
perhaps  not so unusual among the wealthy as among common folk. At any
rate      he came with a very good prenticing fee paid beforehand in gold and
ivory. If he had the makings of a wizard Hemlock would train him, and if he
had, as Hemlock suspected, a mere childish flair, then he’d be sent home with
what remained of his fee. Hemlock was an honest, upright, humorless,
scholarly wizard with little interest in feelings or ideas. His gift was for
names.    “The art begins and ends in naming,” he said, which indeed is true,
although there may be a good deal between the beginning and the end.

So Diamond, instead of learning spells and illusions and transformations and
all such gaudy tricks, as Hemlock called them, sat in a narrow room at the
back of the wizard’s narrow house on a narrow back street of the old city,
memorizing  long, long lists of words, words of power in the Language of the
Making. Plants and parts of plants and animals and parts of animals and
islands   and parts of islands, parts of ships, parts of the human body. The
words never made sense, never made sentences, only lists. Long, long lists.

His mind wandered. “Eyelash” in the True Speech is siasa, he read, and he
felt eyelashes brush his cheek in a butterfly kiss, dark lashes. He looked up
startled and did not know what had touched him. Later when he tried to repeat
the word, he stood dumb.

“Memory, memory,” Hemlock said. “Talent’s no good without memory!” He
was not harsh, but he was unyielding. Diamond had no idea what opinion
Hemlock had of him, and guessed it to be pretty low. The wizard sometimes
had    him come with him to his work, mostly laying spells of safety on ships
and houses, purifying wells, and sitting on the councils of the city, seldom
speaking but always listening. Another wizard, not Roke-trained  but with the
healer’s gift, looked after the sick and dying of South Port. Hemlock was glad
to    let him do so. His own pleasure was in studying and, as far as Diamond
could see, doing no magic at all. “Keep the Equilibrium, it’s all in that,”


Hemlock said, and, “Knowledge, order, and control.” Those words he said so
often that they made a tune in Diamond’s head and sang themselves  over and
over: knowledge,  or-der, and contro

When Diamond put the lists of names to tunes he made up, he learned them
much faster; but then the tune would come as part of the name, and he would
sing out so clearly—for his voice had re-established itself as a strong, dark
tenor—that Hemlock winced. Hemlock’s was a very silent house.

Mostly the pupil was supposed to be with the Master, or studying the lists of
names in the room where the lorebooks and wordbooks were, or asleep.

Hemlock was a stickler for early abed and early afoot. But now and then
Diamond had an hour or two free. He always went down to the docks and sat
on         a pierside or a waterstair and thought about Darkrose. As soon as he 
was
out of the house and away from Master Hemlock, he began to think about
Darkrose, and went on thinking about her and very little else. It surprised him
a     little. He thought he ought to be homesick, to think about his mother. He 
did
think about his mother quite often, and often was homesick, lying on his cot
in  his bare and narrow little room after a scanty supper of cold pea-porridge—
for this wizard, at least, did not live in such luxury as Golden had imagined.

Diamond never thought about Darkrose, nights. He thought of his mother, or
of sunny rooms and hot food, or a tune would come into his head and he
would practice it mentally on the harp in his mind, and so drift off to sleep.

Darkrose would come to his mind only when he was down at the docks,
staring out at the water of the harbor, the piers, the fishing boats, only when
he was outdoors and away from Hemlock and his house.

So he cherished his free hours as if they were actual meetings with her. He
had always loved her, but had not understood that he loved her beyond
anyone and anything. When he was with her, even when he was down on the
docks thinking of her, he was alive. He never felt entirely alive in Master
Hemlock’s house and presence. He felt a little dead. Not dead, but a little
dead.

A few times, sitting on the waterstairs,  the dirty harbor water sloshing at the
next step down, the yells of gulls and dockworkers  wreathing the air with a
thin, ungainly music, he shut his eyes and saw his love so clear, so close, that
he reached out his hand to touch her. If he reached out his hand in his mind
only, as when he played the mental harp, then indeed he touched her. He felt
her hand in his, and her cheek, warm-cool,  silken-gritty, lay against his
mouth. In his mind he spoke to her, and in his mind she answered,  her voice,
her husky voice saying his name, “Diamond      ”

But as he went back up the streets of South Port he lost her. He swore to keep
her with him, to think of her, to think of her that night, but she faded away. 
By


the time he opened the door of Master Hemlock’s house he was reciting lists
of names, or wondering what would be for dinner, for he was hungry most of
the time. Not till he could take an hour and run back down to the docks could
he think of her.

So he came to feel that those hours were true meetings with her, and he lived
for them, without knowing what he lived for until his feet were on the
cobbles, and his eyes on the harbor and the far line of the sea. Then he
remembered what was worth remembering.

The winter passed by, and the cold early spring, and with the warm late spring
came a letter from his mother, brought by a carter. Diamond read it and took it
to Master Hemlock, saying, “My mother wonders if I might spend a month at
home this summer.”

“Probably not,” the wizard said, and then, appearing to notice Diamond, put
down his pen and said, “Young man, I must ask you if you wish to continue
studying with me.”

Diamond had no idea what to say. The idea of its being up to him had not
occurred to him. “Do you think I ought to?” he asked at last.

“Probably not,” the wizard said.

Diamond expected to feel relieved, released, but found he felt rejected,
ashamed.

“I’m sorry,” he said, with enough dignity that Hemlock glanced up at him.
“You could go to Roke,” the wizard said.

“To Roke?”

The boy’s drop-jawed stare irritated Hemlock, though he knew it shouldn’t.
Wizards are used to overweening confidence in the young of their kind. They
expect modesty to come later, if at all. “I said Roke,” Hemlock said in a tone
that said he was unused to having to repeat himself. And then, because this
boy, this soft-headed, spoiled, moony boy had endeared himself  to Hemlock
by his uncomplaining  patience, he took pity on him and said, “You should
either go to Roke or find a wizard to teach you what you need. Of course you
need what I can teach you. You need the names. The art begins and ends in
naming. But that’s not your gift. You have a poor memory for words. You
must   train it diligently. However, it’s clear that you do have capacities, and
that they need cultivation and discipline, which another man can give you
better than I can.” So does modesty breed modesty, sometimes, even in
unlikely places. “If  you were to go to Roke, I’d send a letter with you drawing
you  to the particular attention of the Master Summoner.”


“Ah,” said Diamond, floored. The Summoner’s art is perhaps the most arcane
and dangerous of all the arts of magic.

“Perhaps I am wrong,” said Hemlock in his dry, flat voice. “Your gift may be
for Pattern. Or perhaps it’s an ordinary gift for shaping and transformation.

I’m not certain.”

“But you are—I do actually—”

“Oh yes. You are uncommonly slow, young man, to recognize your own
capacities.” It was spoken harshly, and Diamond stiffened up a bit.

“I thought my gift was for music,” he said.

Hemlock dismissed that with a flick of his hand. “I am talking of the True
Art,” he said. “Now I will be frank with you. I advise you to write your
parents—I shall write them too—informing  them of your decision to go to the
School on Roke, if that is what you decide; or to the Great Port, if the Mage
Restive will take you on, as I think he will, with my recommendation. But I
advise against visiting home. The entanglement  of family, friends, and so on
is precisely what you need to be free of. Now, and henceforth.”

“Do wizards have no family?”

Hemlock was glad to see a bit of fire in the boy. “They are one another’s
family,” he said.

“And no friends?”

“They may be friends. Did I say it was an easy life?” A pause. Hemlock
looked directly at Diamond. “There was a girl,” he said.

Diamond met his gaze for a moment, looked down, and said nothing.

“Your father told me. A witch’s daughter,  a childhood playmate. He believed
that you had taught her spells.”

“She taught me.”

Hemlock nodded. “That is quite understandable, among children. And quite
impossible now. Do you understand that?” “No,” Diamond said.

“Sit down,” said Hemlock. After a moment Diamond took the stiff, high-
backed chair facing him.

“I can protect you here, and have done so. On Roke, of course, you’ll be
perfectly safe. The very walls, there...But if you go home, you must be
willing        to protect yourself. It’s a difficult thing for a young man, 
very difficult

—a test of a will that has not yet been steeled, a mind that has not yet seen 
its
true goal. I very strongly advise that you not take that risk. Write your


parents, and go to the Great Port, or to Roke. Half  your year’s fee, which I’ll
return to you, will see to your first expenses.”

Diamond sat upright and still. He had been getting some of his father’s height
and girth lately, and looked very much a man, though a very young one.

“What did you mean, Master Hemlock, in saying that you had protected me
here?”

“Simply as I protect myself,” the wizard said; and after a moment, testily,
“The bargain, boy. The power we give for our power. The lesser state of being
we forego. Surely you know that every true man of  power is celibate.”

There was a pause, and Diamond said, “So you saw to it...that I...”
“Of course. It was my responsibility as your teacher.”

Diamond nodded. He said, “Thank you.” Presently he stood up.
“Excuse me, Master,” he said. “I have to think.”

“Where are you going?”
“Down to the waterfront.”
“Better stay here.”

“I can’t think, here.”

Hemlock might have known then what he was up against; but having told the
boy he would not be his master any longer, he could not in conscience
command him. “You have a true gift, Essiri,” he said, using the name he had
given   the boy in the springs of the Amia, a word that in the Old Speech means
Willow. “I don’t entirely understand it. I think you don’t understand it at 
all.

Take care! To misuse a gift, or to refuse to use it, may cause great loss, great
harm.”

Diamond nodded, suffering, contrite, unrebellious, unmovable.
“Go on,” the wizard said, and he went.

Later he knew he should never have let the boy leave the house. He had
underestimated Diamond’s willpower, or the strength of the spell the girl had
laid           on him. Their conversation was in the morning; Hemlock went back 
to
the ancient cantrip he was annotating; it was not till supper time that he
thought about his pupil, and not until he had eaten supper alone that he
admitted that Diamond had run away.

Hemlock was 10ᵗʰ to practice any of the lesser arts of magic. He did not put
out a finding spell, as any sorcerer might have done. Nor did he call to
Diamond in any way. He was angry; perhaps he was hurt. He had thought


well of the boy, and offered to write the Summoner about him, and then at the
first test of character Diamond had broken. “Glass,” the wizard muttered. At
least this weakness proved he was not dangerous. Some talents were best not
left to run wild, but there was no harm in this fellow, no malice. No ambition.
“No spine,” said Hemlock to the silence of the house. “Let him crawl home to
his mother.”

Still it rankled him that Diamond had let him down flat, without a word of
thanks or apology. So much for good manners, he thought.

As she blew out the lamp and got into bed, the witch’s daughter heard an owl
calling, the little, liquid hu-hu-hu-hu that made people call them laughing
owls. She heard it with a mournful hean. That had been their signal, summer
nights, when they sneaked out to meet in the willow grove down on the banks
of the Amia, when everybody else was sleeping. She would not think of him
at night. Back in the winter she had sent to him night after night. She had
learned her mother’s spell of sending, and knew that it was a true spell. She
had sent him her touch, her voice saying his name, again and again. She had
met a wall of air and silence. She touched nothing. He would not hear.

Several times, all of a sudden, in the daytime, there had been a moment when
she had known him close in mind and could touch him if she reached out. But
at night she knew only his blank absence, his refusal of her. She had stopped
trying to reach him, months ago, but her heart was still very sore.

“Hu-hu-hu,”  said the owl, under her window, and then it said, “Darkrose!”
Startled from her misery, she leaped out of bed and opened the shutters.

“Come on out,” whispered Diamond, a shadow in the starlight.
“Mother’s not home. Come in!” She met him at the door.

They held each other tight, hard, silent for a long time. To Diamond it was as
if he held his future, his own life, his whole life, in his arms.

At last she moved, and kissed his cheek, and whispered, “I missed you, I
missed you, I missed you. How long can you stay?”

“As long as I like.”

She kept his hand and led him in. He was always a little reluctant to enter the
witch’s house, a pungent, disorderly place thick with the mysteries of women
and witchcraft, very different from his own clean comfortable  home, even
more different from the cold austerity of the wizard’s house. He shivered like
a horse as he stood there, too tall for the herb-festooned rafters. He was very
highly strung, and worn out, having walked forty miles in sixteen hours
without food.


“Where’s your mother?” he asked in a whisper.

“Sitting with old Ferny. She died this afternoon, Mother will be there all
night. But how did you get here?”

“Walked.”

“The wizard let you visit home?”
“I ran away.”

“Ran away! Why?”
“To keep you.”

He looked at her, that vivid, fierce, dark face in its rough cloud of hair. She
wore only her shift, and he saw the infinitely delicate, tender rise of her
breasts. He drew her to him again, but though she hugged him she drew away
again, frowning.

“Keep me?” she repeated. “You didn’t seem to worry about losing me all
winter. What made you come back now?”

“He wanted me to go to Roke.”

“To Roke?” She stared. “To Roke, Di? Then you really do have the gift—you
could be a sorcerer?”

To find her on Hemlock’s side was a blow.

“Sorcerers are nothing to him. He means I could be a wizard. Do magery. Not
just witchcraft.”

“Oh I see,” Rose said after a moment. “But I don’t see why you ran away.”
They had let go of each other’s hands.

“Don’t you understand?” he said, exasperated with her for not understanding,
because he had not understood. “A wizard can’t have anything to do with
women. With witches. With all that.”

“Oh, I know. It’s beneath them.”
“It’s not just beneath them—”

“Oh, but it is. I’ll bet you had to unlearn every spell I taught you. Didn’t
you?”

“It isn’t the same kind of thing.”

“No. It isn’t the High Art. It isn’t the True Speech. A wizard mustn’t soil his
lips with common words. “Weak as women’s magic, wicked as women’s
magic,” you think I don’t know what they say? So, why did you come back


here?”

“To see you!”
“What for?”

“What do you think?”

“You never sent to me, you never let me send to you, all the time you were
gone. I was just supposed to wait until you got tired of playing wizard. Well, I
got tired of waiting.” Her voice was nearly inaudible, a rough whisper.

“Somebody’s been coming around,” he said, incredulous that she could turn
against him. “Who’s been after you?”

“None of your business if there is! You go off, you turn your back on me.
Wizards can’t have anything to do with what I do, what my mother does.
Well, I don’t want anything to do with what you do, either, ever. So go!”

Starving hungry, frustrated, misunderstood, Diamond reached out to hold her
again, to make her body understand his body, repeating that first, deep
embrace that had held all the years of their lives in it. He found himself
standing two feet back, his hands stinging and his ears ringing and his eyes
dazzled. Thc lightning was in Rose’s eyes, and her hands sparked as she
clenched them. “Never do that again,” she whispered.

“Never fear,” Diamond said, turned on his heel, and strode out. A string of
dried sage caught on his head and trailed after him.

HE SPENT THE NIGHT in their old place in the sallows. Maybe he hoped
she would come, but she did not come, and he soon slept in sheer weariness.
He woke in the first, cold light. He sat up and thought. He looked at life in
that cold light. It was a different matter from what he had believed it. He went
down to the stream in which he had been named. He drank, washed his hands
and face, made himself look as decent as he could, and went up through the
town to the fine house at the high end, his father’s house.

After the first outcries and embraces, the servants and his mother sat him right
down to breakfast. So it was with warm food in his belly and a certain chill
courage in his heart that he faced his father, who had been out before
breakfast seeing off a string of timber-carts  to the Great Port.

“Well, son!” They touched cheeks. “So Master Hemlock gave you a
vacation?”

“No, sir. I left.”

Golden stared, then filled his plate and sat down. “Left,” he said.
“Yes, sir. I decided that I don’t want to be a wizard.”


“Hmf,” said Golden, chewing. “Left of your own accord? Entirely? With the
Master’s permission?”

“Of  my own accord entirely, without his permission.”

Golden chewed very slowly, his eyes on the table. Diamond had seen his
father look like this when a forester reported an infestation in the chestnut
groves, and when he found a mule-dealer had cheated him.

“He wanted me to go to the College on Roke to study with the Master
Summoner. He was going to send me there. I decided not to go.”

After a while Golden asked, still looking at the table, “Why?”
“It isn’t the life I want.”

Another pause. Golden glanced over at his wife, who stood by the window
listening in silence. Then he looked at his son. Slowly the mixture of anger,
disappointment, confusion, and respect on his face gave way to something
simpler,           a look of complicity, very nearly a wink. “I see,” he said. 
“And what
did you decide you want?”

A pause. “This,” Diamond said. His voice was level. He looked neither at his
father nor his mother.

“Hah!” said Golden. “Well! I will say I’m glad of it, son.” He ate a small
porkpie in one mouthful. “Being a wizard, going to Roke, all that, it never
seemed real, not exactly. And with you off there, I didn’t know what all this
was for, to tell you the truth. All my business. If you’re here, it adds up, you
see. It adds up. Well! But listen here, did you just run off from the wizard?
Did he know you were going?”

“No. I’ll write him,” Diamond said, in his new, level voice.

“He won’t be angry? They say wizards have short tempers. Full of  pride.”
“He’s angry,” Diamond said, “but he won’t do anything.”

So it proved. Indeed, to Golden’s amazement,  Master Hemlock sent back a
scrupulous two-fifths of the prenticing-fee. With the packet, which was
delivered by one of Golden’s carters who had taken a load of spars down to
South Port, was a note for Diamond. It said, “True art requires a single heart.”
The direction on the outside was the Hardic rune for willow. The note was
signed with Hemlock’s rune, which had two meanings: the hemlock tree, and
suffering.

Diamond sat in his own sunny room upstairs, on his comfortable bed, hearing
his mother singing as she went about the house. He held the wizard’s letter
and reread the message and the two runes many times. The cold and sluggish


mind that had been born in him that morning down in the sallows accepted
the lesson. No magic. Never again. He had never given his heart to it. It had
been a game to him, a game to play with Darkrose. Even the names of the
True Speech that he had learned in the wizard’s house, though he knew the
beauty and the power that lay in them, he could let go, let slip, forget. That
was not his language.

He could speak his language only with her. And he had lost her, let her go.
The double heart has no true speech. From now on he could talk only the
language of duty: the getting and the spending, the outlay and the income, the
profit and the loss.

And beyond that, nothing. There had been illusions, little spells, pebbles that
turned to butterflies, wooden birds that flew on living wings for a minute or
two. There had never been a choice, really. There was only one way for him
to go.

GOLDEN WAS immensely happy and quite unconscious of it. “Old man’s
got his jewel back,” said the caner to the forester. “Sweet as new butter, he
is.” Golden, unaware of being sweet, thought only how sweet life was. He had
bought the Reche grove, at a very stiff  price to be sure, but at least old
Lowbough  of Easthill hadn’t got it, and now he and Diamond could develop it
as          it ought to be developed. In among the chestnuts there were a lot 
of  pines,
which could be felled and sold for masts and spars and small lumber, and
replanted with chestnut seedlings. It would in time be a pure stand like the

Big Grove, the heart of his chestnut kingdom. In time, of course. Oak and
chestnut don’t shoot up overnight like alder and willow. But there was time.
There was time, now. The boy was barely seventeen, and he himself  just
forty-five. In his prime. He had been feeling old, but that was nonsense. He
was      in his prime. The oldest trees, past bearing, ought to come out with 
the
pines. Some good wood for furniture could be salvaged from them.

“Well, well, well,” he said to his wife, frequently, “all rosy again, eh? Got 
the
apple of your eye back home, eh? No more moping, eh?”

And Tuly smiled and stroked his hand.

Once instead of smiling and agreeing, she said, “It’s lovely to have him back,
but” and Golden stopped hearing. Mothers were born to worry about their
children, and women were born never to be content. There was no reason why
he should listen to the litany of anxieties by which Tuly hauled herself

through life. Of course she thought a merchant’s life wasn’t good enough for
the boy. She’d have thought being King in Havnor wasn’t good enough for
him.

“When he gets himself  a girl,” Golden said, in answer to whatever it was she


had been saying, “he’ll be all squared away. Living with the wizards, you
know, the way they are, it set him back a bit. Don’t worry about Diamond.
He’ll know what he wants when he sees it!”

“I hope so,” said Tuly.

“At least he’s not seeing the witch’s girl,” said Golden. “That’s done with.”
Later on it occurred to him that neither was his wife seeing the witch
anymore. For years they’d been thick as thieves, against all his warnings, and
now Tangle was never anywhere near the house. Women’s friendships never
lasted. He teased her about it. Finding her strewing pennyroyal and miller’s-
bane in the chests and clothes-presses against an infestation of moths, he said,
“Seems like you’d have your friend the wise woman up to hex ‘em away. Or
aren’t you friends anymore?”

“No,” his wife said in her soft, level voice, “we aren’t.”

“And a good thing too!” Golden said roundly. “What’s become of that
daughter of hers, then? Went off with a juggler, I heard?”

“A musician,” Tuly said. “Last summer.”

“A NAMEDAY PARTY,” said Golden. “Time for a bit of  play, a bit of music
and dancing, boy. Nineteen years old. Celebrate it!”

“I’ll be going to Easthill with Sul’s mules.”

“No, no, no. Sul can handle it. Stay home and have your pany. You’ve been
working hard. We’ll hire a band. Who’s the best in the country? Tarry and his
lot?”

“Father, I don’t want a party,” Diamond said and stood up, shivering his
muscles like a horse. He was bigger than Golden now, and when he moved
abruptly it was startling. “I’ll go to Easthill,” he said, and left the room.

“What’s that all about?” Golden said to his wife, a rhetorical question. She
looked at him and said nothing, a non-rhetorical answer.

After Golden had gone out, she found her son in the counting-room  going
through ledgers. She looked at the pages. Long, long lists of  names and
numbers, debts and credits, profits and losses.

“Di,” she said, and he looked up. His face was still round and a bit peachy,
though the bones were heavier and the eyes were melancholy.

“I didn’t mean to hurt Father’s feelings,” he said.

“If he wants a party, he’ll have it,” she said. Their voices were alike, being 
in
the higher register but dark-toned, and held to an even quietness, contained,
restrained. She perched on a stool beside his at the high desk.


“I can’t,” he said, and stopped, and went on, “I really don’t want to have any
dancing.”

“He’s matchmaking,” Tuly said, dry, fond.
“I don’t care about that.”

“I know you don’t.”
“The problem is...”

“The problem is the music,” his mother said at last.
He nodded.

“My son, there is no reason,” she said, suddenly passionate, “there is no
reason why you should give up everything you love!”

He took her hand and kissed it as they sat side by side.

“Things don’t mix,” he said. “They ought to, but they don’t. I found that out.
When I left the wizard, I thought I could be everything. You know—do
magic, play music, be Father’s son, love Rose. ... It doesn’t work that way.

Things don’t mix.”

“They do, they do,” Tuly said. “Everything is hooked together, tangled up!”
“Maybe things are, for women. But I...I can’t be double-hearted.”

“Double-hearted? You? You gave up wizardry because you knew that if you
didn’t, you’d betray it.”

He took the word with a visible shock, but did not deny it.
“But why did you give up music?”

“I have to have a single heart. I can’t play the harp while I’m bargaining with
a mule-breeder.  I can’t sing ballads while I’m figuring what we have to pay
the pickers to keep ‘em from hiring out to Lowbough!” His voice shook a
little now, a vibrato, and his eyes were not sad, but angry.

“So you put a spell on yourself,” she said, “just as that wizard put one on you.
A spell to keep you safe. To keep you with the mule-breeders, and the nut-
pickers, and these.” She struck the ledger full of lists of names and figures, a
flicking, dismissive tap. “A spell of silence,” she said.

After a long time the young man said, “What else can I do?”

“I don’t know, my dear. I do want you to be safe. I do love to see your father
happy and proud of you. But I can’t bear to see you unhappy, without pride! I
don’t know. Maybe you’re right. Maybe for a man it’s only one thing ever.

But I miss hearing you sing.”


She was in tears. They hugged, and she stroked his thick, shining hair and
apologized for being cruel, and he hugged her again and said she was the
kindest mother in the world, and so she went off. But as she left she turned
back a moment and said, “Let him have the pany, Di. Let yourself  have it.”

“I will,” he said, to comfort her.

GOLDEN ordered the beer and food and fireworks, but Diamond saw to
hiring the musicians.

“Of course I’ll bring my band,” Tarry said, “fat chance I’d miss it! You’ll
have every tootler in the west of the world here for one of your dad’s 
parties.”

“You can tell ‘em you’re the band that’s getting paid.”

“Oh, they’ll come for the glory,” said the harper, a lean, long-jawed, wall-
eyed fellow of forty. “Maybe you’ll have a go with us yourself, then? You had
a hand for it, before you took to making money. And the voice not bad, if
you’d worked on it.”

“I doubt it,” Diamond said.

“That girl you liked, witch’s Rose, she’s tuning about with Labby, I hear. No
doubt they’ll come by.”

“I’ll see you then,” said Diamond, looking big and handsome and indifferent,
and walked off.

“Too high and mighty these days to stop and talk,” said Tarry, “though I
taught him all he knows of harping. But what’s that to a rich man?”

TARRY’S MALICE had left his nerves raw, and the thought of the party
weighed on him till he lost his appetite. He thought hopefully for a while that
he   was sick and could miss the party. But the day came, and he was there. Not
so evidently, so eminently, so flamboyantly there as his father, but present,
smiling, dancing. All his childhood friends were there too, half  of them
married     by now to the other half, it seemed, but there was still plenty of
flirting going on, and several pretty girls were always near him. He drank a
good deal of Gadge Brewer’s excellent beer, and found he could endure the
music if he was dancing to it and talking and laughing while he danced. So he
danced with all the pretty girls in turn, and then again with whichever one
turned  up again, which all of them did.

It was Golden’s grandest party yet, with a dancing floor built on the town
green down the way from Golden’s house, and a tent for the old folks to eat
and drink and gossip in, and new clothes for the children, and jugglers and
puppeteers, some of them hired and some of them coming by to pick up
whatever  they could in the way of coppers and free beer. Any festivity drew


itinerant entertainers and musicians it was their living, and though uninvited
they were welcomed. A tale-singer with a droning voice and a droning
bagpipe was singing The Deed of the Dragonlord to a group of people under
the    big oak on the hilltop. When Tarry’s band of harp, fife, viol, and drum
took time off for a breather and a swig, a new group hopped up onto the dance
floor. “Hey, there’s Labby’s band!” cried the pretty girl nearest Diamond.
“Come on, they’re the best!”

Labby, a light-skinned, flashy-looking fellow, played the double-reed
woodhorn.

With him were a violist, a tabor-player, and Rose, who played fife. Their first
tune was a stampy, fast and brilliant, too fast for some of the dancers.

Diamond and his partner stayed in, and people cheered and clapped them
when they finished the dance, sweating and panting. “Beer!” Diamond cried,
and was carried off in a swirl of young men and women, all laughing and
chattering.

He heard behind him the next tune start up, the viol alone, strong and sad as a
tenor voice: “Where My Love Is Going.”

He drank a mug of beer down in one draft, and the girls with him watched the
muscles in his strong throat as he swallowed,  and they laughed and chattered,
and he shivered all over like a cart horse stung by flies. He said, “Oh! I 
can’t

—!” He bolted off into the dusk beyond the lanterns hanging around the
brewer’s booth. “Where’s he going?” said one, and another, “He’ll be back,”
and they laughed and chattered.

The tune ended. “Darkrose,” he said, behind her in the dark. She turned her
head and looked at him. Their heads were on a level, she sitting crosslegged
up on the dance platform, he kneeling on the grass.

“Come to the sallows,” he said.

She said nothing. Labby, glancing at her, set his woodhorn to his lips. The
drummer struck a triple beat on his tabor, and they were off into a sailor’s 
jig.

When she looked around again Diamond was gone.

Tarry came back with his band in an hour or so, ungrateful for the respite and
much the worse for beer. He interrupted the tune and the dancing, telling
Labby loudly to clear out.

“Ah, pick your nose, harp-picker,”  Labby said, and Tarry took offense, and
people took sides, and while the dispute was at its brief height, Rose put her
fife in her pocket and slipped away.

Away from the lanterns of the party it was dark, but she knew the way in the


dark. He was there. The willows had grown, these two years. There was only
a little space to sit among the green shoots and the long, falling leaves.

The music started up, distant, blurred by wind and the murmur of the river
running.

“What did you want, Diamond?”
“To talk.”

They were only voices and shadows to each other.
“So,” she said.

“I wanted to ask you to go away with me,” he said.
“When?”

“Then. When we quarreled. I said it all wrong. I thought. ...” A long pause. “I
thought I could go on running away. With you. And play music. Make a
living. Together. I meant to say that.”

“You didn’t say it.”

“I know. I said everything wrong. I did everything wrong. I betrayed
everything. The magic. And the music. And you.”

“I’m all right,” she said.
“Are you?”

“I’m not really good on the fife, but I’m good enough. What you didn’t teach
me, I can fill in with a spell, if I have to. And the band, they’re all right.

Labby isn’t as bad as he looks. Nobody fools with me. We make a pretty good
living. Winters, I go stay with Mother and help her out. So I’m all right. What
about you, Di?”

“All wrong.”

She started to say something, and did not say it.
“I guess we were children,” he said. “Now.    ”

“What’s changed?”

“I made the wrong choice.”
“Once?” she said. “Or twice?”
“Twice.”

“Third time’s the charm.”

Neither spoke for a while. She could just make out the bulk of him in the


leafy shadows. “You’re bigger than you were,” she said. “Can you still make
a light, Di? I want to see you.”

He shook his head.

“That was the one thing you could do that I never could. And you never could
teach me.”

“I didn’t know what I was doing,” he said. “Sometimes it worked, sometimes
it didn’t.”

“And the wizard in South Pon didn’t teach you how to make it work?”
“He only taught me names.”

“Why can’t you do it now?”

“I gave it up, Darkrose. I had to either do it and nothing else, or not do it. 
You
have to have a single hean.”

“I don’t see why,” she said. “My mother can cure a fever and ease a childbirth
and find a lost ring, maybe that’s nothing compared to what the wizards and
the dragonlords can do, but it’s not nothing, all the same. And she didn’t give
up anything for it. Having me didn’t stop her. She had me so that she could
learn how to do it! Just because I learned how to play music from you, did I
have to give up saying spells? I can bring a fever down now too. Why should
you have to stop doing one thing so you can do the other?”

“My father,” he began, and stopped, and gave a kind of laugh. “They don’t go
together,” he said. “The money and the music.”

“The father and the witch-girl,” said Darkrose.

Again there was silence between them. The leaves of the willows stirred.

“Would you come back to me?” he said. “Would you go with me, live with
me, marry me, Darkrose?”

“Not in your father’s house, Di.”
“Anywhere. Run away.”

“But you can’t have me without the music.”
“Or the music without you.”

“I would,” she said.

“Does Labby want a harper?”

She hesitated; she laughed. “If he wants a fife-player,” she said.

“I haven’t practiced ever since I left, Darkrose,”  he said. “But the music was


always in my head, and you....” She reached out her hands to him. They knelt
facing, the willow-leaves  moving across their hair. They kissed each other,
timidly at first.

IN THE YEARS after Diamond left home, Golden made more money than he
had ever done before. All his deals were profitable. It was as if good fortune
stuck to him and he could not shake it off. He grew immensely wealthy.

He did not forgive his son. It would have made a happy ending, but he would
not have it. To leave so, without a word, on his nameday night, to go off with
the witch-girl, leaving all the honest work undone, to be a vagrant musician, a
harper twanging and singing and grinning for pennies—there was nothing but
shame and pain and anger in it for Golden. So he had his tragedy.

Tuly shared it with him for a long time, since she could see her son only by
lying to her husband, which she found hard to do. She wept to think of
Diamond hungry, sleeping hard. Cold nights of  autumn were a misery to her.
But     as time went on and she heard him spoken of as Diamond the sweet
singer of the West of  Havnor, Diamond who had harped and sung to the great
lords in the Tower of the Sword, her heart grew lighter. And once, when
Golden was down ‘at South Port, she and Tangle took a donkey cart and
drove  over to Easthill, where they heard Diamond sing the Lay of the Lost
Queen, while Rose sat with them, and Little Tuly sat on Tuly’s knee. And if
not      a happy ending, that was a true joy, which may be enough to ask for, 
after
all.


The Bones of the Earth

IT WAS RAINING  AGAIN, and the wizard of  Re Albi was sorely tempted to
make a weather spell, just a little, small spell, to send the rain on round the
mountain. His bones ached. They ached for the sun to come out and shine
through his flesh and dry them out. Of course he could say a pain spell, but all
that would do was hide the ache for a while. There was no cure for what ailed
him. Old bones need the sun. The wizard stood still in the doorway of his
house, between the dark room and the rain-streaked open air, preventing
himself  from making a spell, and angry at himself  for preventing himself  and
for having to be prevented.

He never swore-men of  power do not swear, it is not safe-but he cleared his
throat with a coughing growl, like a bear. A moment later a thunderclap  rolled
off the hidden upper slopes of Gont Mountain, echoing round from north to
south, dying away in the cloud-filled forests.

A good sign, thunder, Dulse thought. It would stop raining soon. He pulled up
his hood and went out into the rain to feed the chickens.

He checked the henhouse, finding three eggs. Red Bucca was setting. Her
eggs were about due to hatch. The mites were bothering her, and she looked
scruffy and jaded. He said a few words against mites, told himself  to
remember   to clean out the nest box as soon as the chicks hatched, and went
on         to the poultry yard, where Brown Bucca and Grey and Leggings and
Candor and the King huddled under the eaves making soft, shrewish remarks
about rain.

“It’ll stop by midday,” the wizard told the chickens. He fed them and
squelched back to the house with three warm eggs. When he was a child he
had   liked to walk in mud. He remembered enjoying the cool of it rising
between his toes. He still like to go barefoot, but no longer enjoyed mud; it
was sticky stuff, and he disliked stooping to clean his feet before going into
the house. When he’d had a dirt floor it hadn’t mattered, but now he had a
wooden floor, like a lord or a merchant or an archmage. To keep the cold and
damp out of his bones. Not his own notion. Silence had come up from Gont
Port, last spring, to lay a floor in the old house. They had had one of their
arguments about it. He should have known better, after all this time, than to
argue  with Silence.

“I’ve walked on dirt for seventy-five years,” Dulse had said. “A few more
won’t kill me!”


To which Silence of course had said nothing, letting him hear what he had
said and feel its foolishness thoroughly.

“Dirt’s easier to keep clean,” he said, knowing the struggle already lost. It 
was
true that all you had to do with a good hard-packed clay floor was sweep it
and now and then sprinkle it to keep the dust down. But it sounded silly all
the same.

“Who’s to lay this floor?” he said, now merely querulous.
Silence nodded, meaning himself.

The boy was in fact a workman of the first order, carpenter, cabinetmaker,
stonelayer,  roofer;  he had proved that when he lived up here as Dulse’s
student,       and his life with the rich folk of Gont Pon had not softened his 
hands.
He brought the boards from Sixth’s mill in Re Albi, driving Gammer’s ox-
team; he laid the floor and polished it the next day, while the old wizard was
up    at Bog Lake gathering  simples. When Dulse came home there it was,
shining like a dark lake itself. “Have to wash my feet every time I come in,”
he grumbled. He walked in gingerly. The wood was so smooth it seemed soft
to the bare sole. “Satin,” he said. “You didn’t do all that in one day without a
spell or two. A village hut with a palace floor. Well, it’ll be a sight, come
winter, to see the fire shine in that! Or do I have to get me a carpet now? A
fleecefell, on a golden warp?”

Silence smiled. He was pleased with himself.

He had turned up on Dulse’s doorstep a few years ago. Well, no, twenty years
ago it must be, or twenty-five.  A while ago now. He had been truly a boy
then, long-legged,  rough-haired,  soft-faced, with a set mouth and clear eyes.
“What do you want?” the wizard had asked, knowing what he wanted, what
they all wanted, and keeping his eyes from those clear eyes. He was a good
teacher, the best on Gont, he knew that. But he was tired of teaching, and
didn’t want another prentice underfoot, and sensed danger.

“To learn,” the boy whispered.

“Go to Roke,” the wizard said. The boy wore shoes and a good leather vest.
He could afford or earn ship’s passage to the School.

“I’ve been there.”

At that Dulse looked him over again. No cloak, no staff.
“Failed?  Sent away? Ran away?”

The boy shook his head at each question. He shut his eyes; his mouth was
already shut. He stood there, intensely gathered, suffering: drew breath:
looked straight into the wizard’s  eyes.


“My mastery is here, on Gont,” he said, still speaking hardly above a whisper.
“My master is Heleth”.

At that the wizard whose true name was Heleth stood as still as he did,
looking back at him, till the boy’s gaze dropped.

In silence Dulse sought his name, and saw two things: a fir-cone, and the rune
of the Closed Mouth. Then seeking further he heard in his mind a name
spoken; but he did not speak it.

“I’m tired of teaching and talking,” he said. “I need silence. Is that enough 
for
you?”

The boy nodded once.

“Then to me you are Silence,” the wizard said. “You can sleep in the nook
under the west window. There’s an old pallet in the woodhouse. Air it. Don’t
bring mice in with it.” And he stalked off towards the Overfell, angry with the
boy for coming and with himself  for giving in; but it was not anger that made
his heart pound. Striding along-he could stride, then-with the seawind pushing
at him always from the left and the early sunlight on the sea out past the vast
shadow of the mountain, he thought of the Mages of Roke, the masters of the
art magic, the professors of mystery and power. “He was too much for ‘em,
was he? And he’ll be too much for me,” he thought, and smiled. He was a
peaceful man, but he did not mind a bit of danger.

He stopped and felt the dirt under his feet. He was barefoot, as usual. When
he was a student on Roke, he had worn shoes. But he had come back home to
Gont, to Re Albi, with his wizard’s staff, and kicked his shoes off. He stood
still and felt the dust and rock of the cliff-top path under his feet, and the 
cliffs
under that, and the roots of the island in the dark under that. In the dark 
under
the waters all islands touched and were one. So his teacher Ard had said, and
so his teachers on Roke had said. But this was his island, his rock, dust, 
dirt.

His wizardry grew out of it. “My mastery is here,” the boy had said, but it
went deeper than mastery. That, perhaps, was something Dulse could teach
him: what went deeper than mastery. What he had learned here, on Gont,
before he ever went to Roke.

And the boy must have a staff. Why had Nemmerle let him leave Roke
without one, empty-handed  as a prentice or a witch? Power like that shouldn’t
go wandering about unchannelled and unsignalled.

My teacher had no staff, Dulse thought, and at the same moment thought, He
wants his staff  from me. Gontish oak, from the hands of a Gontish wizard.

Well, if he earns it I’ll make him one. If he can keep his mouth closed. And
I’ll leave him my lore-books. If he can clean out a henhouse, and understand


the Glosses of Danemer, and keep his mouth closed.

The new student cleaned out the henhouse and hoed the bean-patch, learned
the meaning of the Glosses of  Danemer and the Arcana of the Enlades, and
kept his mouth closed. He listened. He heard what Dulse said; sometimes he
heard what Dulse thought. He did what Dulse wanted and what Dulse did not
know he wanted. His gift was far beyond Dulse’s guidance, yet he had been
right to come to Re Albi, and they both knew it.

Dulse thought sometimes in those years about sons and fathers. He had
quarreled with his own father, a sorcerer-prospector, over his choice of a
teacher;  his father had shouted that a student of Ard’s was no son of his, had
nursed his rage and died unforgiving.

Dulse had seen young men weep for joy at the binh of a first son. He had seen
poor men pay witches a year’s earnings for the promise of a healthy boy, and
a rich man touch his gold-bedizened baby’s face and whisper, adoring, “My
immortality!”  He had seen men beat their sons, bully and humiliate them,
spite             and thwart them, hating the death they saw in them. He had 
seen the
answering hatred in the son’s eyes, the threat, the pitiless contempt. And
seeing          it, Dulse knew why he had never sought reconciliation with his 
father.

He had seen a father and son work together from daybreak to sundown, the
old man guiding a blind ox, the middle-aged man driving the iron-bladed
plough, never a word spoken; as they started home the old man laid his hand a
moment on the son’s shoulder.

He had always remembered that. He remembered it now, when he looked
across the hearth, winter evenings, at the dark face bent above a lore-book or
a shirt that needed mending. The eyes cast down, the mouth closed, the spirit
listening.

“Once in his lifetime, if he’s lucky, a wizard finds somebody he can talk to.”
Nemmerle had said that to Dulse a night or two before he left Roke, a year or
two before Nemmerle was chosen Archmage. He had been the Master
Patterner and the kindest of all Dulse’s teachers at the School. “I think, if 
you
stayed, Heleth, we could talk.”

Dulse had been unable to answer at all for a while. Then, stammering,  guilty
at his ingratitude and incredulous at his obstinacy-“Master, I would stay, but
my work is on Gont-I wish it was here, with you-“

“It’s a rare gift, to know where you need to be, before you’ve been to all the
places you don’t need to be. Well, send me a student now and then. Roke
needs Gontish wizardry. I think we’re leaving things out, here, things worth
knowing.    ”


Dulse had sent students on to the School, three or four of them, nice lads with
a gift for this or that; but the one Nemmerle waited for had come and gone of
his own will, and what they had thought of him on Roke Dulse did not know.
Silence did not say. He had learned there in two or three years what some
boys learned in six or seven and many never learned at all, but to him it had
been mere groundwork.

“Why didn’t you come to me first?” Dulse had demanded. “And then Roke, to
put a polish on it?”

“I didn’t want to waste your time.”

“Did Nemmerle know you were coming to work with me?”
Silence shook his head.

“If you’d deigned to tell him your intentions, he might have sent a message to
me.”

Silence looked stricken. “Was he your friend?”

Dulse paused. “He was my master. Would have been my friend, perhaps, if
I’d stayed on Roke. Have wizards friends? No more than they have wives, or
sons, some would say. ... Once he said to me that in our trade it’s a lucky man
who finds someone to talk to. Keep that in mind. If you’re lucky, one day
you’ll have to open your mouth.”

Silence bowed his rough, thoughtful head.
“If it hasn’t rusted shut,” Dulse added.

“If you ask me to, I’ll talk,” the young man said, so earnest, so willing to 
deny
his whole nature at Dulse’s request that the wizard had to laugh.

“I asked you not to,” he said, “and it’s not my need I spoke of. I talk enough
for two. Never mind. You’ll know what to say when the time comes. That’s
the art, eh? What to say, and when to say it. And the rest is silence.”

The young man slept on a pallet under the little west window of Dulse’s
house for three years. He learned wizardry, fed the chickens, milked the cow.
He suggested,  once, that Dulse keep goats. He had not said anything for a
week or so, a cold, wet week of autumn. He said, “You might keep some
goats.”

Dulse had the big lore-book open on the table. He had been trying to reweave
one of the Acastan Spells, much broken and made powerless by the
Emanations  of Fundaur centuries ago. He had just begun to get a sense of the
missing word that might fill one of the gaps, he almost had it, and-“You might
keep some goats,” Silence said.


Dulse considered himself a wordy, impatient man with a short temper. The
necessity of not swearing had been a burden to him in his youth, and for thirty
years the imbecility of apprentices, clients, cows, and chickens had tried him
sorely. Apprentices and clients were afraid of his tongue, though cows and
chickens paid no attention to his outbursts. He had never been angry at
Silence  before. There was a very long pause.

“What for?”

Silence apparently did not notice the pause or the extreme softness of Dulse’s
voice. “Milk, cheese, roast kid, company,” he said.

“Have you ever kept goats?” Dulse asked, in the same soft, polite voice.
Silence shook his head.

He was in fact a town boy, born in Gont Port. He had said nothing about
himself, but Dulse had asked around a bit. The father, a longshoreman, had
died     in the big earthquake,  when Silence would have been seven or eight; 
the
mother was a cook at a waterfront inn. At twelve the boy had got into some
kind  of trouble, probably messing about with magic, and his mother had
managed to prentice him to Elassen, a respectable sorcerer in Valmouth.

There the boy had picked up his true name, and some skill in carpentry and
farmwork, if not much else; and Elassen had had the generosity, after three
years, to pay his passage to Roke. That was all Dulse knew about him.

“I dislike goat cheese,” Dulse said.
Silence nodded, acceptant as always.

From time to time in the years since then, Dulse remembered how he hadn’t
lost his temper when Silence asked about keeping goats; and each time the
memory gave him a quiet satisfaction, like that of finishing the last bite of a
perfectly ripe pear.

After spending the next several days trying to recapture the missing word, he
had set Silence to studying the Acastan Spells. Together they had finally
worked it out, a long toil. “Like ploughing with a blind ox,” Dulse said.

Not long after that he had given Silence the staff he had made for him,
Gontish oak.

And the Lord of Gont Port had tried once again to get Dulse to come down to
do what needed doing in Gont Port, and Dulse had sent Silence down instead,
and there he had stayed.

And Dulse was standing on his own doorstep, three eggs in his hand and the
rain running cold down his back.


How long had he been standing here? Why was he standing here? He had
been thinking about mud, about the floor, about Silence. Had he been out
walking on the path above the Overfell? No, that was years ago, years ago, in
the sunlight. It was raining. He had fed the chickens, and come back to the
house with three eggs, they were still warm in his hand, silky brown
lukewarm eggs, and the sound of thunder was still in his mind, the vibration
of  thunder was in his bones, in his feet. Thunder?

No. There had been a thunderclap, a while ago. This was not thunder. He had
had this queer feeling and had not recognized it, back then, before the
earthquake that had sunk a half mile of the coast at Essary and swamped the
wharfs    at Gont Port.

He stepped down from the doorstep onto the dirt so that he could feel the
ground with the nerves of his soles, but the mud slimed and fouled any
messages  the dirt had for him. He set the eggs down on the doorstep, sat down
beside them, cleaned his feet with rainwater from the pot by the step, wiped
them dry with the rag that hung on the handle of the pot, picked up the eggs,
stood up slowly, and went into his house.

He gave a sharp look at his staff, which leaned in the corner behind the door.
He put the eggs in the larder, ate an apple quickly because he was hungry, and
took his staff. It was yew, bound at the foot with copper, worn to silk at the
grip. Nemmerle  had given it to him.

“Stand!” he said to it in its language, and let go of it. It stood as if he had
driven it into a socket.

“To the root,” he said impatiently,  in the language of the Making. “To the
root!”

He watched the staff that stood on the shining floor. In a little while he saw 
it
quiver very slightly, a shiver, a tremble.

“Ah, ah, ah,” said the old wizard.

“What should I do?” he said aloud after a while.
The staff swayed, was still, shivered again.

“Enough of that, my dear,” Dulse said, laying his hand on it. “Come now. No
wonder I kept thinking about Silence. I should send for him ...  send to him ...
No. What did Ard say? Find the center, find the center. That’s the question to
ask. That’s what to do...” As he muttered on to himself, routing out his heavy
cloak, setting water to boil on the small fire he had lighted earlier, he
wondered if he had always talked to himself, if he had talked all the time
when Silence lived with him. No, it had become a habit after Silence left, he


thought, with the bit of his mind that went on thinking the ordinary thoughts
of life, while the rest of it made preparations for terror and destruction.

He hard-boiled the three new eggs and one already in the larder and put them
into a pouch along with four apples and a bladder of resinated wine, in case
he had to stay out all night. He shrugged arthritically into his heavy cloak,
took up his staff, told the fire to go out, and left.

He no longer kept a cow. He stood looking into the poultry yard, considering.
The fox had been visiting the orchard lately. But the birds would have to
forage if he stayed away. They must take their chances, like everyone else. He
opened their gate a little. Though the rain was no more than a misty drizzle
now, they stayed hunched up under the henhouse eaves, disconsolate. The
King had not crowed once this morning.

“Have you anything to tell me?” Dulse asked them.

Brown Bucca, his favorite, shook herself  and said her name a few times. The
others said nothing.

“Well, take care. I saw the fox on the full-moon night,” Dulse said, and went
on his way.

As he walked he thought; he thought hard; he recalled. He recalled all he
could of matters his teacher had spoken of once only and long ago. Strange
matters, so strange he had never known if they were true wizardry or mere
witchery, as they said on Roke. Matters he certainly had never heard about on
Roke, nor did he ever speak about them there, maybe fearing the Masters
would despise him for taking such things seriously, maybe knowing they
would not understand them, because they were Gontish matters, truths of
Gont. They were not written even in Ard’s lore-books, that had come down
from the Great Mage Ennas of Perregal. They were all word of mouth. They
were home truths.

“If you need to read the Mountain,” his teacher had told him, “go to the Dark
Pond at the top of Semere’s cow pasture. You can see the ways from there.

You need to find the center. See where to go in.”
“Go in?” the boy Dulse had whispered.

“What could you do from outside?”

Dulse was silent for a long time, and then said, “How?”

“Thus.” And Ard’s long arms had stretched out and upward in the invocation
of what Dulse would know later was a great spell of Transforming. Ard spoke
the words of the spell awry, as teachers of wizardry must do lest the spell
operate. Dulse knew the trick of hearing them aright and remembering them.


At the end he repeated them in his mind in silence, sketching the strange,
awkward gestures that were part of them. All at once his hand stopped.

“But you can’t undo this!” he said aloud.
Ard nodded. “It is irrevocable”.

Dulse knew no transformation that was irrevocable,  no spell that could not be
unsaid, except the Word of Unbinding, which is spoken only once.

“But why-?”

“At need,” Ard said.

Dulse knew better than to ask for explanation. The need to speak such a spell
could not come often; the chance of his ever having to use it was very slight.
He let the terrible spell sink down in his mind and be hidden and layered over
with a thousand useful or beautiful or enlightening mageries and charms, all
the lore and rules of  Roke, all the wisdom of the books Ard had bequeathed
him. Crude, monstrous, useless, it lay in the dark of his mind for sixty years,
like the cornerstone of an earlier, forgotten house down in the cellar of a
mansion full of lights and treasures and children.

The rain had ceased, though mist still hid the peak and shreds of cloud drifted
through the high forests. Dulse was not a tireless walker like Silence, who
would have spent his life wandering in the forests of Gont Mountain if he
could; but he had been born in Re Albi and knew the roads and ways around
it     as part of himself. He took the shortcut at Rissi’s well and came out 
before
midday on Semere’s high pasture, a level step on the mountainside. A mile
below  it, all sunlit now, the farm buildings stood in the lee of a hill, across
which  a flock of sheep moved like a cloud-shadow.  Gont Port and its bay
were hidden under the steep, knotted hills that stood above the city.

Dulse wandered about a bit before he found what he took to be the Dark
Pond. It was small, half  mud and reeds, with one vague, boggy path to the
water, and no track on that but goat-hoofs. The water was dark, though it lay
out under the bright sky and far above the peat soils. Dulse followed the goat-
tracks, growling when his foot slipped in the mud and he wrenched his ankle

to keep from falling. At the brink of the water he stood still. He stooped to 
rub
his ankle. He listened.

It was absolutely silent.

No wind. No birdcall. No distant lowing or bleating or call of voice. As if all
the island had gone still. Not a fly buzzed.

He looked at the dark water. It reflected nothing.

Reluctant, he stepped forward, barefoot and bare-legged; he had rolled up his


cloak into his pack an hour ago when the sun came out. Reeds brushed his
legs. The mud was soft and sucking under his feet, full of tangling reed-roots.
He made no noise as he moved slowly out into the pool, and the circles of
ripples from his movement were slight and small. It was shallow for a long
way. Then his cautious foot felt no bottom, and he paused.

The water shivered. He felt it first on his thighs, a lapping like the tickling
touch of fur; then he saw it, the trembling of the surface all over the pond. 
Not
the round ripples he made, which had already died away, but a ruffling, a
roughening, a shudder, again, and again.

“Where?” he whispered, and then said the word aloud in the language all
things understand that have no other language.

There was the silence. Then a fish leapt from the black, shaking water, a
white-grey fish the length of his hand, and as it leapt it cried out in a small,
clear voice, in that same language, “Yaved!”

The old wizard stood there. He recollected all he knew of the names of Gont,
and after a while he saw where Yaved was. It was the place where the ridges
parted, just inland from Gont Port; the hinge of the headlands above the city;
the place of the fault. An eanhquake centered there could shake the city
down, bring avalanche and tidal wave, close the cliffs of the bay together like
hands clapping. Dulse shivered, shuddered all over like the water of the pool.

He turned and made for the shore, hasty, careless where he set his feet and not
caring if he broke the silence by splashing and breathing hard. He slogged
back up the path through the reeds till he reached dry ground and coarse
grass, and heard the buzz of midges and crickets. He sat down then on the
ground, rather hard, for his legs were shaking.

“It won’t do,” he said, talking to himself in Hardic, and then he said, “I can’t
do it.” Then he said, “I can’t do it by myself.”

He was so distraught that when he made up his mind to call Silence he could
not think of the opening of the spell, which he had known for sixty years; then
when he thought he had it, he began to speak a Summoning  instead, and the
spell had begun to work before he realised what he was doing and stopped
and undid it word by word.

He pulled up some grass and rubbed at the slimy mud on his feet and legs. It
was not dry yet, and only smeared about on his skin. “I hate mud,” he
whispered.  Then he snapped his jaws and stopped trying to clean his legs.
“Dirt,     dirt,” he said, gently patting the ground he sat on. Then, very 
slow, very
careful, he began to speak the spell of calling.

In a busy street leading down to the busy wharfs of Gont Port, the wizard


Ogion stopped short. The ship’s captain beside him walked on several steps
and turned to see Ogion talking to the air.

“But I will come, master!” he said. And then after a pause, “How soon?” And
after a longer pause, he told the air something in a language the ship’s captain
did not understand, and made a gesture that darkened the air about him for an
instant.

“Captain,” he said, “I’m sorry, I must wait to spell your sails. An earthquake
is near. I must warn the city. Do you tell them down there, every ship that can
sail make for the open sea. Clear out, past the Armed Cliffs! Good luck to
you.” And he turned and ran back up the street, a tall, strong man with rough
greying hair, running now like a stag.

Gont Port lies at the inner end of a long narrow bay between steep shores. Its
entrance from the sea is between two great headlands, the Gates of the Port,
the Armed Cliffs, not a hundred feet apart. They are safe from sea-pirates in
Gont Port. But their safety is their danger; the long bay follows a fault in the
earth, and jaws that have opened may shut.

When he had done what he could to warn the city, and seen all the gate-
guards and port-guards doing what they could to keep the few roads out from
becoming choked and murderous with panicky people, Ogion shut himself
into          a room in the signal tower of the Port, locked the door, for 
everybody
wanted him at once, and sent a sending to the Dark Pond in Semere’s cow
pasture up on the Mountain.

His old master was sitting in the grass near the pond, eating an apple. Bits of
eggshell flecked the ground near his legs, which were caked with drying mud.
When he looked up and saw Ogion’s sending he smiled a wide, sweet smile.

But he looked old. He had never looked so old. Ogion had not seen him for
over a year, having been busy; he was always busy in Gont Port, doing the
business of the lords and people, never a chance to walk in the forests on the
mountainside or to come sit with Heleth in the little house at Re Albi and
listen         and be still. Heleth was an old man, near eighty now; and he was
frightened. He smiled with joy to see Ogion, but he was frightened.

“I think what we have to do,” he said without preamble, “is try to hold the
fault from slipping much, you at the Gates and me at the inner end, in the
Mountain. Working together, you know. We might be able to. I can feel it
building up, can you?”

Ogion shook his head. He let his sending sit down in the grass near Heleth,
though it did not bend the stems of the grass where it stepped or sat. “I’ve
done nothing but set the city in a panic,” he said. “And send the ships out of
the bay. What is it you feel? How do you feel it?”


They were technical questions, mage to mage. Heleth hesitated before
answering.

“I learned about this from Ard,” he said, and paused again.

He had never told Ogion anything about his first teacher, a sorcerer of  no
fame, even in Gont, and perhaps of ill fame. There was some mystery or
shame connected with Ard. Though he was talkative, for a wizard, Heleth was
silent as a stone about some things. Ogion, who respected silence, had never
asked him about his teacher.

“It’s not Roke magic,” the old man said. His voice was dry, a little forced.
“Not to do with the Old Powers, either. Nothing of that sort. Nothing sticky.”

That had always been his word for evil doings, spells for gain, curses, black
magic: “sticky stuff.”

After a while, searching for words, he went on: “Dirt. Rocks. It’s a dirty
magic. Old. Very old. As old as Gont Island.”

“The Old Powers?” Ogion murmured.
Heleth said. “I’m not sure.”

“Will it control the earth itself?”

“More a mater of  getting in with it, I think.” The old man was burying the
core of his apple and the larger bits of eggshell under loose dirt, patting it
over them neatly. “Of course I know the words, but I’ll have to learn what to
do as I go. That’s the trouble with the big spells, isn’t it? You learn what
you’re doing while you do it. No chance to practice. “Ah-there! You feel
that?”

Ogion shook his head.

“Straining,”  Heleth said, his hand still absently, gently patting the dirt as 
one
might pat a scared cow. “Quite soon now, I think. Can you hold the Gates
open, my dear?”

“Tell me what you’ll be doing-”

But Heleth was shaking his head: “No,” he said, “no time. Not your kind of
thing.” He was more and more distracted by whatever it was he sensed in the
earth or air, and through him Ogion felt that gathering, intolerable tension.

They sat unspeaking. The crisis passed. Heleth relaxed a little and even
smiled. “Very old stuff,” he said, “what I’ll be doing. I wish now I’d thought
about it more. Passed it on to you. But it seemed a bit crude. Heavy-handed

.    She didn’t say where she’d learned it. Here, of course ...  There are
different kinds of knowledge, after all.”


“She?”

“Ard. My teacher.” Heleth looked up, his face unreadable,  its expression
possibly sly. “You didn’t know that? No, I suppose I never mentioned it. But
it doesn’t make much difference, after all. Since we none of us have any sex,
us wizards, do we? What matters is whose house we live in. It seems we may
have left out a good deal worth knowing. This kind of thing-There!  There
again-”

His sudden tension and immobility, the strained face and inward look, were
like those of a woman in labor when her womb contracts. That was Ogion’s
thought, even as he said, “What did you mean, “in the Mountain’?”

The spasm passed; Heleth answered, “Inside it. There at Yaved.” He pointed
to the knotted hills below them. “I’ll go in, try to keep things from sliding
around, eh? I’ll find out when I’m doing it, no doubt. I think you should be
getting back to yourself. Things are tightening up.” He stopped again, looking
as    if he were in intense pain, hunched and clenched. He struggled to stand 
up.
Unthinking,  Ogion held out his hand to help him.

“No use,” said the old wizard, grinning, “you’re only wind and sunlight. Now
I’m going to be dirt and stone. You’d best go on. Farewell, Aihal. Keep the-
keep the mouth open, for once, eh?”

Ogion, obedient,  bringing himself back to himself in the stuffy, tapestried
room in Gont Port, did not understand the old man’s joke until he turned to
the window and saw the Armed Cliffs down at the end of the long bay, the
jaws ready to snap shut. “I will,” he said, and set to it.

“What I have to do, you see,” the old wizard said, still talking to Silence
because it was a comfort to talk to him even if he was no longer there, “is get
into the mountain, right inside; but not the way a sorcerer-prospector does;
not just slipping about between things and looking and tasting. Deeper. All
the way in. Not the veins, but the bones. So,” and standing there alone in the
high pasture, in the noon light, Heleth opened his arms wide in the gesture of
invocation that opens all the greater spells; and he spoke.

Nothing happened as he said the words Ard had taught him, his old witch-
teacher with her bitter mouth and her long, lean arms, the words spoken awry
then, spoken truly now.

Nothing happened, and he had time to regret the sunlight and the seawind,
and to doubt the spell, and to doubt himself, before the earth rose up around
him, dry, warm, and dark.

In there he knew he should hurry, that the bones of the earth ached to move,
and that he must become them to guide them, but he could not hurry. There


was on him the bewilderment of any transformation. He had in his day been
fox, and bull, and dragonfly, and knew what it was to change being. But this
was different, this slow enlargement. I am vastening, he thought.

He reached out towards Yaved, towards the ache, the suffering. As he came
closer to it he felt a great strength flow into him from the west, as if Silence
had taken him by the hand after all. Through that link he could send his own
strength, the Mountain’s strength, to help. I didn’t tell him I wasn’t coming
back,   he thought, his last words in Hardic, his last grief, for he was in the
bones of the mountain now. He knew the arteries of fire, and the beat of the
great heart. He knew what to do. It was in no tongue of man that he said, “Be
quiet, be easy. There now, there. Hold fast. So, there. We can be easy.”

And he was easy, he was still, he held fast, rock in rock and earth in earth in
the fiery dark of the mountain.

It was their mage Ogion whom the people saw stand alone on the roof  of the
signal tower on the wharf, when the streets ran up and down in waves, the
cobbles bursting out of them, and walls of clay brick puffed into dust, and the
Armed Cliffs leaned together, groaning. It was Ogion they saw, his hands held
out before him, straining, parting: and the cliffs parted with them, and stood
straight, unmoved. The city shuddered and stood still. It was Ogion who
stopped   the eanhquake. They saw it, they said it.

My teacher was with me, and his teacher with him,” Ogion said when they
praised him. “I could hold the Gate open because he held the Mountain still.”
They praised his modesty and did not listen to him. Listening is a rare gift,
and men will have their heroes.

When the city was in order again, and the ships had all come back, and the
walls were being rebuilt, Ogion escaped from praise and went up into the hills
above Gont Port. He found the queer little valley called Trimmer’s  Dell, the
true name of which in the language of the Making was Yaved, as Ogion’s true
name was Aihal. He walked about there all one day, as if seeking something.
In  the evening he lay down on the ground and talked to it. “You should have
told me, I could have said goodbye,” he said. He wept once, and his tears fell
on the dry dirt among the grass-stems and made little spots of mud, little
sticky spots.

He slept there, on the ground. At sunrise he got up and walked by the high
road over to Re Albi. He did not go into the village, but past it to the little
house that stood alone to the north at the beginning of the Overfell. The door
of the house stood open.

The last beans had got big and coarse on the vines; the cabbages were
thriving. Three hens came clucking and pecking around the dusty dooryard, a


red, a brown, a white; a grey hen was setting her clutch in the henhouse.
There were no chicks, and no sign of the cock, the King, Heleth had called
him. The king is dead, Ogion thought. Maybe a chick is hatching even now to
take his place. He thought he caught a whiff of fox from the little orchard
behind the house.

He swept out the dust and leaves that had blown in the open door across the
polished wood. He set Heleth’s mattress and blanket in the sun to air. “I’ll
stay here a while,” he thought. “It’s a good house.” After a while he thought,
“I might keep some goats.”

On the High Marsh

THE ISLAND OF SEMEL lies north and west across the Pelnish Sea from
Havnor, south and west of the Enlades. Though it is one of the great isles of
the Earthsea Archipelago, there aren’t many stories from Semel. Enlad has its
glorious history, and Havnor its wealth, and Paln its ill repute, but Semel has
only cattle and sheep, forests and little towns, and the great silent volcano
called Andanden standing over all.

South of Andanden lies a land where the ashes fell a hundred feet deep when
last the volcano spoke. Rivers and streams cut their way seaward through that
high plain, winding and pooling, spreading and wandering, making a marsh of
it, a big, desolate, waterland with a far horizon, few trees, not many people.

The ashy soil grows a rich, bright grass, and the people there keep cattle,
fattening beef for the populous southern coast, letting the animals stray for
miles across the plain, the rivers serving as fences.

As mountains will, Andanden makes the weather. It gathers clouds around it.
The summer is short, the winter long, out on the high marsh.

In the early darkness of a winter day, a traveler stood at the windswept
crossing of two paths, neither very promising,  mere cattle tracks among the
reeds, and looked for some sign of the way he should take.

As he came down the last slope of the mountain,  he had seen houses here and
there out in the marshlands,  a village not far away. He had thought he was on
the way to the village, but had taken a wrong turning somewhere. Tall reeds
rose up close beside the paths, so that if a light shone anywhere  he could not
see it. Water chuckled softly somewhere  near his feet. He had used up his
shoes walking round Andanden on the cruel roads of black lava. The soles
were worn right through, and his feet ached with the icy damp of the marsh
paths.


It grew darker quickly. A haze was coming up from the south, blotting out the
sky. Only above the huge, dim bulk of the mountain did stars burn clearly.

Wind whistled in the reeds, soft, dismal.

The traveler stood at the crossway and whistled back at the reeds.

Something moved on one of the tracks, something big, dark, in the darkness.

“Are you there, my dear?” said the traveler. He spoke in the Old Speech, the
Language of the Making. “Come along, then, Ulla,” he said, and the heifer
came a step or two towards him, towards her name, while he walked to meet
her. He made out the big head more by touch than sight, stroking the silken
dip between her eyes, scratching her forehead at the roots of the nubbin horns.
“Beautiful, you are beautiful,” he told her, breathing her grassy breath,
leaning against her large warmth. “Will you lead me, dear Ulla? Will you lead
me where I need to go?”

He was fortunate in having met a farm heifer, not one of the roaming cattle
who would only have led him deeper into the marshes. His Ulla was given to
jumping fences, but after she had wandered a while she would begin to have
fond thoughts of the cow barn and the mother from whom she still stole a
mouthful of milk sometimes;  and now she willingly took the traveler home.
She walked, slow but purposeful, down one of the tracks, and he went with
her, a hand on her hip when the way was wide enough. When she waded a
knee-deep stream, he held on to her tail. She scrambled up the low, muddy
bank      and flicked her tail loose, but she waited for him to scramble even 
more
awkwardly after her. Then she plodded gently on. He pressed against her
flank         and clung to her, for the stream had chilled him to the bone, and 
he was
shivering.

“Moo,” said his guide, softly, and he saw the dim, small square of yellow
light just a little to his left.

“Thank you,” he said, opening the gate for the heifer, who went to greet her
mother, while he stumbled across the dark houseyard to the door.

It would be Berry at the door, though why he knocked she didn’t know.
“Come in, you fool!” she said, and he knocked again, and she put down her
mending and went to the door. “Can you be drunk already?” she said, and
then  saw him.

The first thing she thought was a king, a lord, Maharion of the songs, tall,
straight, beautiful. The next thing she thought was a beggar, a lost man, in
dirty clothes, hugging himself with shivering arms.

He said, “I lost my way. Have I come to the villager?” His voice was hoarse
and harsh, a beggar’s voice, but not a beggar’s accent.


“It’s a half  mile on,” said Gift.
“Is there an inn?”

“Not till you’d come to Oraby, a ten-twelve miles on south.” She considered
only briefly. “If  you need a room for the night, I have one. Or San might, if
you’re going to the village.”

“I’ll stay here if I may,” he said in that princely way, with his teeth 
chattering,
holding on to the doorjamb to keep on his feet.

“Take your shoes off,” she said, “they’re soaking. Come in then.” She stood
aside and said, “Come to the fire,” and had him sit down in Bren’s settle close
to the heanh. “Stir the fire up a bit,” she said. “Will you have a bit of soup?

It’s still hot.”

“Thank you, mistress,” he muttered, crouching at the fire. She brought him a
bowl of broth. He drank from it eagerly yet warily, as if long unaccustomed to
hot soup.

“You came over the mountain?”
He nodded.

“Whatever for?”

“To come here,” he said. He was beginning to tremble less. His bare feet were
a sad sight, bruised, swollen, sodden. She wanted to tell him to put them right
to the fire’s warmth, but didn’t like to presume. Whatever he was, he wasn’t a
beggar by choice.

“Not many come here to the High Marsh,” she said. “Peddlers and such. But
not in winter.”

He finished his soup, and she took the bowl. She sat down in her place, the
stool by the oil lamp to the right of the hearth, and took up her mending. “Get
warm through, and then I’ll show you your bed,” she said. “There’s no fire in
that room. Did you meet weather, up on the mountain? They say there’s been
snow.”

“Some flurries,” he said. She got a good look at him now in the light of lamp
and fire. He was not a young man, thin, not as tall as she had thought. It was a
fine face, but there was something wrong, something amiss. He looks ruined,
she thought, a ruined man.

“Why would you come to the Marsh?” she asked. She had a right to ask,
having taken him in, yet she felt a discomfort in pressing the question.

“I was told there’s a murrain among the cattle here.” Now that he wasn’t all
locked up with cold his voice was beautiful. He talked like the tale-tellers


when they spoke the parts of the heroes and the dragonlords. Maybe he was a
teller or a singer? But no; the murrain, he had said.

“There is.”

“I may be able to help the beasts.”
“You’re a curer?”

He nodded.

“Then you’ll be more than welcome. The plague is terrible among the cattle.
And getting worse.”

He said nothing. She could see the warmth coming into him, untying him.

“Put your feet up to the fire,” she said abruptly. “I have some old shoes of my
husbands.” It cost her something to say that, yet when she had said it she felt
released, untied too. What was she keeping Bren’s shoes for, anyhow? They
were too small for Berry and too big for her. She’d given away his clothes,
but kept the shoes, she didn’t know what for. For this fellow, it would seem.

Things came round if you could wait for them, she thought. “I’ll set em out
for you,” she said. “Yours are perished.”

He glanced at her. His dark eyes were large, deep, opaque like a horse’s eyes,
unreadable.

“He’s dead,” she said, “two years. The marsh fever. You have to watch out for
that, here. The water. I live with my brother. He’s in the village, at the 
tavern.
We keep a dairy. I make cheese. Our herd’s been all right,” and she made the
sign to avert evil. “I keep em close in. Out on the ranges, the murrain’s very
bad. Maybe the cold weather’ll put an end to it.”

“More likely to kill the beasts that sicken with it,” the man said. He sounded a
bit sleepy.

“I’m called Gift,” she said. “My brother’s Berry.”

“Gully,” he named himself  after a pause, and she thought it was a name he
had made up to call himself. It did not fit him. Nothing about him fit together,
made a whole. Yet she felt no distrust of him. She was easy with him. He
meant no harm to her. She thought there was kindness in him, the way he
spoke   of the animals. He would have a way with them, she thought. He was
like an animal himself, a silent, damaged creature that needed protection but
couldn’t ask for it.

“Come” she said, “before you fall asleep there,” and he followed her
obediently to Berry’s room, which wasn’t much more than a cupboard built
onto      the corner of the house. Her room was behind the chimney. Berry would


come in, drunk, in a while, and she’d put down the pallet in the chimney
corner for him. Let the traveler have a good bed for a night. Maybe he’d leave
a copper or two with her when he went on. There was a terrible shortage of
coppers in her household these days.

He woke, as he always did, in his room in the Great House. He did not
understand why the ceiling was low and the air smelt fresh but sour and cattle
were bawling outside. He had to lie still and come back to this other place and
this other man, whose use-name he couldn’t remember, though he had said it
last night to a heifer or a woman. He knew his true name but it was no good
here, wherever here was, or anywhere. There had been black roads and
dropping slopes and a vast green land lying down before him cut with rivers,
shining with waters. A cold wind blowing. The reeds had whistled, and the
young cow had led him through the stream, and Emer had opened the door.

He had known her name as soon as he saw her. But he must use some other
name. He must not call her by her name. He must remember what name he
had told her to call him. He must not be Irioth, though he was Irioth. Maybe
in time he would be another man. No; that was wrong; he must be this man.
This man’s legs ached and his feet hurt. But it was a good bed, a feather bed,
warm, and he need not get out of it yet. He drowsed a while, drifting away
from Irioth.

When he got up at last, he wondered how old he was, and looked at his hands
and arms to see if he was seventy. He still looked forty, though he felt seventy
and moved like it, wincing. He got his clothes on, foul as they were from days
and days of travel. There was a pair of shoes under the chair, worn but good,
strong shoes, and a pair of knit wool stockings to go with them. He put the
stockings on his battered feet and limped into the kitchen. Emer stood at the
big    sink, straining something heavy in a cloth.

“Thank you for these and the shoes,” he said, and thanking her for the gift,
remembered her use-name but said only, “mistress.”

“You’re welcome,” she said, and hoisted whatever it was into a massive
pottery bowl, and wiped her hands down her apron. He knew nothing at all
about women. He had not lived where women were since he was ten years
old.   He had been afraid of them, the women that shouted at him to get out of
the way in that great other kitchen long ago. But since he had been traveling
about in Earthsea he had met women and found them easy to be with, like the
animals; they went about their business not paying much attention to him
unless      he frightened them. He tried not to do that. He had no wish or 
reason to
frighten them. They were not men.

“Would you like some fresh curds? It makes a good breakfast.” She was
eyeing him, but not for long, and not meeting his eyes. Like an animal, like a


cat, she was, sizing him up but not challenging. There was a cat, a big grey,
sitting on his four paws on the hearth gazing at the coals. Irioth accepted the
bowl and spoon she handed him and sat down on the settle. The cat jumped
up beside him and purred.

“Look at that,” said the woman. “He’s not friendly with most folk.”
“It’s the curds.”

“He knows a curer, maybe.”

It was peaceful here with the woman and the cat. He had come to a good
house.

“It’s cold out,” she said. “Ice on the trough this morning. Will you be going
on, this day?”

There was a pause. He forgot that he had to answer in words. “I’d stay if I
might,” he said. “I’d stay here.”

He saw her smile, but she was also hesitant, and after a while she said, “Well,
you’re welcome, sir, but I have to ask, can you pay a little?”

“Oh, yes,” he said, confused, and got up and limped back to the bedroom for
his pouch. He brought her a piece of  money, a little Enladian crownpiece of
gold.

“Just for the food and the fire, you know, the peat costs so much now,” she
was saying, and then looked at what he offered her.

“Oh, sir,” she said, and he knew he had done wrong.

“There’s nobody in the village could change that,” she said. She looked up
into his face for a moment. “The whole village together couldn’t change
that!” she said, and laughed. It was all right, then, though the word “change”
rang and rang in his head.

“It hasn’t been changed,” he said, but he knew that was not what she meant.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “If I stayed a month, if I stayed the winter, would that
use it up? I should have a place to stay, while I work with the beasts.”

“Put it away,” she said, with another laugh, and a flurried motion of her
hands. “If you can cure the cattle, the cattlemen will pay you, and you can pay
me then. Call that surety, if you like. But put it away, sir! It makes me dizzy 
to
look at it. -Berry,” she said, as a nobbly, dried-up man came in the door with a
gust of cold wind, “the gentleman will stay with us while he’s curing the

cattle-speed the work! He’s given us surety of  payment. So you’ll sleep in the
chimney corner, and him in the room. This is my brother Berry, sir.”

Berry ducked his head and muttered. His eyes were dull. It seemed to Irioth


that the man had been poisoned. When Berry went out again, the woman
came closer and said, resolute, in a low voice, “There’s no harm in him but
the drink, but there’s not much left of him but the drink. It’s eaten up most of
his mind, and most of what we have. So, do you see, put up your money
where he won’t see it, if you don’t mind, sir. He won’t come looking for it.

But if he saw it, he’d take it. He often doesn’t know what he’s doing, do you
see.”

“Yes,” Irioth said. “I understand. You are a kind woman.” She was talking
about him, about his not knowing what he was doing. She was forgiving him.
“A kind sister,” he said. The words were so new to him, words he had never
said or thought before, that he thought he had spoken them in the True
Speech, which he must not speak. But she only shrugged, with a frowning
smile.

“Times I could shake his fool head off,” she said, and went back to her work.

He had not known how tired he was until he came to haven. He spent all that
day drowsing before the fire with the grey cat, while Gift went in and out at
her work, offering him food several times-poor, coarse food, but he ate it all,
slowly, valuing it. Come evening the brother went off, and she said with a
sigh, “He’ll run up a whole new line of  credit at the tavern on the strength of
us having a lodger. Not that it’s your fault.”

“Oh, yes,” Irioth said. “It was my fault.” But she forgave; and the grey cat
was pressed up against his thigh, dreaming. The cat’s dreams came into his
mind, in the low fields where he spoke with the animals, the dusky places.
The  cat leapt there, and then there was milk, and the deep soft thrilling. 
There
was no fault, only the great innocence. No need for words. They would not
find him here. He was not here to find. There was no need to speak any name.
There was nobody but her, and the cat dreaming, and the fire flickering. He
had come over the dead mountain on black roads, but here the streams ran
slow among the pastures.

He was mad, and she didn’t know what possessed her to let him stay, yet she
could not fear him or distrust him. What did it matter if he was mad? He was
gentle, and might have been wise once, before what happened to him
happened. And he wasn’t so mad as all that. Mad in patches, mad at moments.
Nothing in him was whole, not even his madness. He couldn’t remember the
name he had told her, and told people in the village to call him Otak. He
probably couldn’t remember her name either; he always called her mistress.

But maybe that was his courtesy. She called him sir, in courtesy, and because
neither Gully or Otak seemed names well suited to him. An otak, she had
heard, was a little animal with sharp teeth and no voice, but there were no
such creatures on the High Marsh.


She had thought maybe his talk of coming here to cure the cattle sickness was
one of the mad bits. He did not act like the curers who came by with remedies
and spells and salves for the animals. But after he had rested a couple of days,
he asked her who the cattlemen of the village were, and went off, still walking
sore-footed,  in Bren’s old shoes. It made her heart turn in her, seeing that.

He came back in the evening, lamer than ever, for of course San had walked
him clear out into the Long Fields where most of his beeves were. Nobody
had horses but Alder, and they were for his cowboys. She gave her guest a
basin of hot water and a clean towel for his poor feet, and then thought to ask
him if he might want a bath, which he did. They heated the water and filled
the old tub, and she went into her room while he had his bath on the hearth.

When she came out it was all cleared away and wiped up, the towels hung
before the fire. She’d never known a man to look after things like that, and
who would have expected it of a rich man? Wouldn’t he have servants, where
he came from? But he was no more trouble than the cat. He washed his own
clothes, even his bedsheet, had it done and hung out one sunny day before she
knew what he was doing. “You needn’t do that, sir, I’ll do your things with
mine,” she said.

“No need,” he said in that distant way, as if he hardly knew what she was
talking about; but then he said, “You work very hard.”

“Who doesn’t? I like the cheese making. There’s an interest to it. And I’m
strong. All I fear is getting old, when I can’t lift the buckets and the molds.”
She showed him her round, muscular arm, making a fist and smiling. “Pretty
good for fifty years old!” she said. It was silly to boast, but she was proud of
her strong arms, her energy and skill.

“Speed the work,” he said gravely.

He had a way with her cows that was wonderful. When he was there and she
needed a hand, he took Berry’s place, and as she told her friend Tawny,
laughing,   he was cannier with the cows than Bren’s old dog had been. “He
talks        to em, and I’ll swear they consider what he says. And that heifer 
follows
him about like a puppy.” Whatever he was doing out on the ranges with the
beeves, the cattlemen were coming to think well of him. Of course they would
grab at any promise of help. Half San’s herd was dead. Alder would not say
how many head he had lost. The bodies of cattle were everywhere. If it had
not been cold weather the Marsh would have reeked of rotting flesh. None of
the water could be drunk unless you boiled it an hour, except what came from
the wells, hers here and the one in the village, which gave the place its name.

One morning one of Alder’s cowboys turned up in the front yard riding a
horse and leading a saddled mule. “Master Alder says Master Otak can ride


her, it being a ten-twelve miles out to the East Fields,” the young man said.

Her guest came out of the house. It was a bright, misty morning, the marshes
hidden by gleaming vapors. Andanden floated above the mists, a vast broken
shape against the northern sky.

The curer said nothing to the cowboy but went straight to the mule, or hinny,
rather, being out of San’s big jenny by Alder’s white horse. She was a whitey
roan, young, with a pretty face. He went and talked to her for a minute, saying
something in her big, delicate ear and rubbing her topknot.

“He does that,” the cowboy said to Gift. “Talks at em.” He was amused,
disdainful. He was one of  Berry’s drinking mates at the tavern, a decent
enough young fellow, for a cowboy.

“Is he curing the cattle?” she asked.

“Well, he can’t lift the murrain all at once. But seems like he can cure a beast
if he gets to it before the staggers begin. And those not struck yet, he says he
can keep it off em. So the master’s sending him all about the range to do what
can be done. It’s too late for many.”

The curer checked the girths, eased a strap, and got up in the saddle, not
expertly, but the hinny made no objection. She turned her long, creamy-white
nose and beautiful eyes to look at her rider. He smiled. Gift had never seen
him smile.

“Shall we go?” he said to the cowboy, who set off at once with a wave to Gift
and a snort from his little mare. The curer followed. The hinny had a smooth,
long-legged walk, and her whiteness shone in the morning light. Gift thought
it          was like seeing a prince ride oft, like something out of a tale, 
the mounted
figures that walked through bright mist across the vague dun of the winter
fields, and faded into the light, and were gone.

It was hard work out in the pastures. “Who doesn’t do hard work?” Emer had
asked, showing her round, strong arms, her hard, red hands. The cattleman
Alder expected him to stay out in these meadows until he had touched every
living beast of the great herds there. Alder had sent two cowboys along. They
made a camp of sorts, with a groundcloth and a half tent. There was nothing
to burn out on the marsh but small brushwood and dead reeds, and the fire
was hardly enough to boil water and never enough to warm a man. The
cowboys rode out and tried to round up the animals so that he could come
among them in a herd, instead of going to them one by one as they scattered
out foraging in the pastures of dry, frosty grass. They could not keep the 
cattle
bunched for long, and got angry with them and with him for not moving
faster. It was strange to him that they had no patience with the animals, which


they treated as things, handling them as a log rafter handles logs in a river, 
by
mere force.

They had no patience with him either, always at him to hurry up and get done
with the job; nor with themselves, their life. When they talked to each other it
was always about what they were going to do in town, in Oraby, when they
got paid off. He heard a good deal about the whores in Oraby, Daisy and
Goldie and the one they called the Burning Bush. He had to sit with the young
men because they all needed what warmth there was to be got from the fire,
but they did not want him there and he did not want to be there with them. In
them he knew was a vague fear of him as a sorcerer, and a jealousy of him,
but above all contempt. He was old, other, not one of them. Fear and jealousy
he knew and shrank from, and contempt he remembered. He was glad he was
not one of them, that they did not want to talk to him. He was afraid of doing
wrong to them.

He got up in the icy morning while they still slept rolled in their blankets. He
knew where the cattle were nearby, and went to them. The sickness was very
familiar to him now. He felt it in his hands as a burning, and a queasiness if 
it
was much advanced. Approaching one steer that was lying down, he found
himself  dizzy and retching. He came no closer, but said words that might ease
the dying, and went on.

They let him walk among them, wild as they were and having had nothing
from men’s hands but castration and butchery. He had a pleasure in their trust
in him, a pride in it. He should not, but he did. If he wanted to touch one of
the great beasts he had only to stand and speak to it a little while in the
language of those who do not speak. “Ulla,” he said, naming them. “Ellu.

Ellua.” They stood, big, indifferent; sometimes one looked at him for a long
time. Sometimes one came to him with its easy, loose, majestic tread, and
breathed into his open palm. All those that came to him he could cure. He laid
his hands on them, on the stiff-haired, hot flanks and neck, and sent the
healing into his hands with the words of  power spoken over and over. After a
while the beast would give a shake, or toss its head a bit, or step on. And he
would drop his hands and stand there, drained and blank, for a while. Then
there would be another one, big, curious, shyly bold, muddy-coated,  with the
sickness in it like a prickling, a tingling, a hotness in his hands, a 
dizziness.
“Ellu,” he would say, and walk to the beast and lay his hands upon it until
they    felt cool, as if a mountain stream ran through them.

The cowboys were discussing whether or not it was safe to eat the meat of a
steer dead of the murrain. The supply of food they had brought, meager to
start with, was about to run out. Instead of riding twenty or thirty miles to
restock, they wanted to cut the tongue out of a steer that had died nearby that


morning.

He had forced them to boil any water they used. Now he said, “If you eat that
meat, in a year you’ll begin to get dizzy. You’ll end with the blind staggers
and die as they do.”

They cursed and sneered, but believed him. He had no idea if what he said
was true. It had seemed true as he said it. Perhaps he wanted to spite them.
Perhaps he wanted to get rid of them.

“Ride back,” he said. “Leave me here. There’s enough food for one man for
three or four days more. The hinny will bring me back.”

They needed no persuasion. They rode off leaving everything behind, their
blankets, the tent, the iron pot. “How do we get all that back to the village?”
he   asked the hinny. She looked after the two ponies and said what hinnies say.
“Aaawww!” she said. She would miss the ponies.

“We have to finish the work here,” he told her, and she looked at him mildly.
All animals were patient, but the patience of the horse kind was wonderful,
being freely given. Dogs were loyal, but there was more of obedience in it.

Dogs were hierarchs, dividing the world into lords and commoners. Horses
were all lords. They agreed to collude. He remembered walking among the
great, plumed feet of  cart horses, fearless. The comfort of their breath on his
head. A long time ago. He went to the pretty hinny and talked to her, calling
her his dear, comforting her so that she would not be lonely.

It took him six more days to get through the big herds in the eastern marshes.
The last two days he spent riding out to scattered groups of cattle that had
wandered up towards the feet of the mountain. Many of them were not
infected     yet, and he could protect them. The hinny carried him bareback and
made the going easy. But there was nothing left for him to eat. When he rode
back to the village he was light-headed  and weak-kneed. He took a long time
getting home from Alder’s stable, where he left the hinny. Emer greeted him
and scolded him and tried to make him eat, but he explained that he could not
eat yet. “As I stayed there in the sickness, in the sick fields, I felt sick. 
After a
while I’ll be able to eat again,” he explained.

“You’re crazy,” she said, very angry. It was a sweet anger. Why could not
more anger be sweet?

“At least have a bath!” she said.

He knew what he smelled like, and thanked her.

“What’s Alder paying you for all this?” she demanded while the water was
heating. She was still indignant, speaking more bluntly even than usual.


“I don’t know,” he said.

She stopped and stared at him.
“You didn’t set a price?”

“Set a price?” he flashed out. Then he remembered who he was not, and
spoke humbly. “No. I didn’t.”

“Of all the innocence,” Gift said, hissing the word. “He’ll skin you.” She
dumped a kettleful of steaming water into the bath. “He has ivory,” she said.
“Tell him ivory it has to be. Out there ten days starving in the cold to cure 
his
beasts! San’s got nothing but copper, but Alder can pay you in ivory. I’m
sorry      if I’m meddling in your business.  Sir.” She flung out the door with 
two
buckets, going to the pump. She would not use the stream water for anything
at     all, these days. She was wise, and kind. Why had he lived so long among
those who were not kind?

“We’ll have to see,” said Alder, the next day, “if my beasts are cured. If they
make it through the winter, see, we’ll know your cures all took, that they’re
sound, like. Not that I doubt it, but fair’s fair, right? You wouldn’t ask me to
pay you what I have in mind to pay you, would you now, if the cure didn’t
take and the beasts died after all. Avert the chance! But I wouldn’t ask you to
wait all that time unpaid, neither.  So here’s an advance, like, on what’s to
come, and all’s square between us for now, right?”

The coppers weren’t decently in a bag, even. Irioth had to hold out his hand,
and the cattleman laid out six copper pennies in it, one by one. “Now then!
That’s fair and square!” he said, expansive. “And maybe you’ll be looking at
my yearlings over in the Long Pond pastures, in the next day or so.”

“No,” Irioth said. “Sans herd was going down fast when I left. I’m needed
there.”

“Oh, no, you’re not, Master Otak. While you were out in the east range a
sorcerer curer came by, a fellow that’s been here before, from the south coast,
and  so San hired him. You work for me and you’ll be paid well. Better than
copper, maybe, if the beasts fare well!”

Irioth did not say yes, or no, or thanks, but went off unspeaking. The
cattleman looked after him and spat. “Avert,” he said.

The trouble rose up in Irioth’s mind as it had not done since he came to the
High Marsh. He struggled against it. A man of power had come to heal the
cattle, another man of power. But a sorcerer, Alder had said. Not a wizard, not
a mage. Only a curer, a cattle healer. I do not need to fear him. I do not need
to fear his power. I do not need his power. I must see him, to be sure, to be


certain. If he does what I do here there is no harm. We can work together. If I
do what he does here. If he uses only sorcery and means no harm. As I do.

He walked down the straggling street of  Purewells to Sans house, which was
about midway, opposite the tavern. San, a hardbitten man in his thirties, was
talking to a man on his doorstep, a stranger. When they saw Irioth they looked
uneasy. San went into his house and the stranger followed.

Irioth came up onto the doorstep. He did not go in, but spoke in the open door.
“Master San, it’s about the cattle you have there between the rivers. I can go
to them today.” He did not know why he said this. It was not what he had
meant to say.

"Ah,” San said, coming to the door, and hemmed a bit. “No need, Master
Otak. This here is Master Sunbright, come up to deal with the murrain. He’s
cured beasts for me before, the hoof  rot and all. Being as how you have all
one man can do with Alder’s beeves, you see...”

The sorcerer came out from behind San. His name was Ayeth. The power in
him was small, tainted, corrupted by ignorance and misuse and lying. But the
jealousy in him was like a stinging fire. “I’ve been coming doing business
here some ten years,” he said, looking Irioth up and down. “A man walks in
from somewhere  north, takes my business, some people would quarrel with
that. A quarrel of sorcerers is a bad thing. If you’re a sorcerer, a man of
power, that is. I am. As the good people here well know.”

Irioth tried to say he did not want a quarrel. He tried to say that there was
work for two. He tried to say he would not take the man’s work from him. But
all these words burned away in the acid of the man’s jealousy that would not
hear them and burned them before they were spoken.

Ayeth’s stare grew more insolent as he watched Irioth stammer. He began to
say something to San, but Irioth spoke.

"You have-" he said-“you have to go. Back.” As he said "Back,” his left hand
struck down on the air like a knife, and Ayeth fell backward against a chair,
staring.

He was only a little sorcerer, a cheating healer with a few sorry spells. Or so
he seemed. What if he was cheating, hiding his power, a rival hiding his
power? A jealous rival. He must be stopped, he must be bound, named, called.
Irioth began to say the words that would bind him, and the shaken man
cowered away, shrinking down, shriveling, crying out in a thin, high wail. It is
wrong, wrong, I am doing the wrong, I am the ill, Irioth thought. He stopped
the spell words in his mouth, fighting against them, and at last crying out one
other word. Then the man Ayeth crouched there, vomiting and shuddering,


and San was staring and trying to say, “Avert! Avert!” And no harm was done.
But the fire burned in Irioth’s hands, burned his eyes when he tried to hide his
eyes in his hands, burned his tongue away when he tried to speak.

For a long time nobody would touch him. He had fallen down in a fit in San’s
doorway. He lay there now like a dead man. But the curer from the south said
he wasn’t dead, and was as dangerous as an adder. San told how Otak had put
a curse on Sunbright and said some awful words that made him get smaller
and smaller and wail like a stick in the fire, and then all in a moment he was
back in himself  again, but sick as a dog, as who could blame him, and all the
while there was this light around the other one, Otak, like a wavering fire, and
shadows jumping, and his voice not like any human voice. A terrible thing.

Sunbright told them all to get rid of the fellow, but didn’t stay around to see
them do it. He went back down the south road as soon as he’d gulped a pint of
beer at the tavern, telling them there was no room for two sorcerers in one
village and he’d be back, maybe, when that man, or whatever he was, had
gone.

Nobody would touch him. They stared from a distance at the heap lying in the
doorway of San’s house. San’s wife wept aloud up and down the street. “Bad
cess! Bad cess!” she cried. “Oh, my babe will be born dead, I know it!”

Berry went and fetched his sister, after he had heard Sunbright’s tale at the
tavern, and San’s version of it, and several other versions already current. In
the best of them, Otak had towered up ten feet tall and struck Sunbright into a
lump of coal with lightning, before foaming at the mouth, turning blue, and
collapsing in a heap.

Gift hurried to the village. She went straight up to the doorstep, bent over the
heap, and laid her hand on it. Everybody gasped and muttered, “Avert!

Avert!” except Tawny’s youngest daughter, who mistook the signs and piped
up, “Speed the work!”

The heap moved, and roused up slowly. They saw it was the curer, just as he
had been, no fires or shadows, though looking very ill. “Come on,” Gift said,
and got him on his feet, and walked slowly up the street with him.

The villagers shook their heads. Gift was a brave woman, but there was such
a thing as being too brave. Or brave, they said around the tavern table, in the
wrong way, or the wrong place, d’you see. Nobody should ought to meddle
with sorcery that ain’t born to it. Nor with sorcerers. You forget that. They
seem the same as other folk. But they ain’t like other folk. Seems there’s no
harm in a curer. Heal the foot rot, clear a caked udder. That’s all fine. But
cross one and there you are, fire and shadows and curses and falling down in
fits. Uncanny. Always was uncanny, that one. Where’d he come from,


anyhow? Answer me that.

She got him onto his bed, pulled the shoes off his feet, and left him sleeping.
Berry came in late and drunker than usual, so that he fell and gashed his
forehead on the andiron. Bleeding and raging, he ordered Gift to kick the
shorsher  out the housh, right away, kick ‘inn out. Then he vomited into the
ashes   and fell asleep on the hearth. She hauled him onto his pallet, pulled 
his
shoes off his feet, and left him sleeping.  She went to look at the other one. 
He
looked feverish, and she put her hand on his forehead. He opened his eyes,
looking straight into hers without expression. “Emer,” he said, and closed his
eyes again.

She backed away from him, terrified.

In her bed, in the dark, she lay and thought: He knew the wizard who named
me. Or I said my name. Maybe I said it out loud in my sleep. Or somebody
told him. But nobody knows it. Nobody ever knew my name but the wizard,
and my mother. And they’re dead, they’re dead... I said it in my sleep...

But she knew better.

She stood with the little oil lamp in her hand, and the light of it shone red
between her fingers and golden on her face. He said her name. She gave him
sleep.

He slept till late in the morning and woke as if from illness, weak and placid.
She was unable to be afraid of him. She found that he had no memory at all of
what had happened in the village, of the other sorcerer, even of the six
coppers she had found scattered on the bedcover, which he must have held
clenched in his hand all along.

“No doubt that’s what Alder gave you,” she said. “The flint!”

“I said I’d see to his beasts at... at the pasture between the rivers, was it?” 
he
said, getting anxious, the hunted look coming back into him, and he got up
from the settle.

“Sit down,” she said. He sat down, but he sat fretting.
“How can you cure when you’re sick?” she said.
“How else?” he said.

But he quieted down again presently, stroking the grey cat.

Her brother came in. “Come on out,” he said to her as soon as he saw the
curer dozing on the settle. She stepped outside with him.

“Now I won’t have him here no more,” Berry said, coming master of the
house over her, with the great black gash in his forehead, and his eyes like


oysters, and his hands juddering.
“Where’ll you go?” she said.
“It’s      him has to go.”

“It’s my house. Bren’s house. He stays. Go or stay, it’s up to you.”

“It’s up to me too if he stays or goes, and he goes. You haven’t got all the
sayso. All the people say he ought to go. He’s not canny.”

“Oh, yes, since he’s cured half the herds and got paid six coppers for it, time
for him to go, right enough! I’ll have him here as long as I choose, and that’s
the end of it.”

“They won’t buy our milk and cheese,” Berry whined.
“Who says that?”

“Sans wife. All the women.”

“Then I’ll carry the cheeses to Oraby,” she said, “and sell em there. In the
name of honor, brother, go wash out that cut, and change your shirt. You stink
of the pothouse.” And she went back into the house. “Oh, dear,” she said, and
burst into tears.

“What’s the matter, Emer?” said the curer, turning his thin face and strange
eyes to her.

“Oh, it’s no good, I know it’s no good. Nothing’s any good with a drunkard,”
she said. She wiped her eyes with her apron. “Was that what broke you,” she
said, “the drink?”

“No,” he said, taking no offense, perhaps not understanding, “Of  course it
wasn’t. I beg your pardon,” she said.

“Maybe he drinks to try to be another man,” he said. “To alter, to change...”

“He drinks because he drinks,” she said. “With some, that’s all it is. I’ll be 
in
the dairy, now. I’ll lock the house door. There’s... there’s been strangers
about. You rest yourself. It’s bitter out.” She wanted to be sure that he stayed
indoors out of harm’s way, and that nobody came harassing him. Later on she
would go into the village, have a word with some of the sensible people, and
put a stop to this rubbishy talk, if she could.

When she did so, Alder’s wife Tawny and several other people agreed with
her that a squabble between sorcerers over work was nothing new and nothing
to take on about. But San and his wife and the tavern crew wouldn’t let it rest,
it being the only thing of interest to talk about for the rest of the winter,

except the cattle dying. “Besides,” Tawny said, “my man’s never averse to


paying copper where he thought he might have to pay ivory.” “Are the cattle
he touched keeping afoot, then?” “So far as we can see, they are. And no new
sickenings.”  “He’s a true sorcerer, Tawny,” Gift said, very earnest. “I know
it.”     “That’s the trouble, love,” said Tawny. “And you know it! This is no 
place
for a man like that. Whoever he is, is none of our business, but why did he
come here, is what you have to ask.” “To cure the beasts,” Gift said.

Sunbright had not been gone three days when a new stranger appeared in
town: a man riding up the south road on a good horse and asking at the tavern
for lodging. They sent him to Sans house, but San’s wife screeched when she
heard there was a stranger at the door, crying that if San let another witch-
man   in the door her baby would be born dead twice over. Her screaming
could  be heard for several houses up and down the street, and a crowd, that is,
ten or eleven people, gathered between Sans house and the tavern.

“Well, that won’t do,” said the stranger pleasantly. “I can’t be bringing on a
birth untimely. Is there maybe a room above the tavern?”

“Send him on out to the dairy,” said one of Alder’s cowboys. “Gift’s taking
whatever comes.” There was some sniggering and shushing.

“Back that way,” said the taverner.

“Thanks,” said the traveler, and led his horse along the way they pointed.

“All the foreigners  in one basket,” said the taverner, and this was repeated
that night at the tavern several dozen times, an inexhaustible  source of
admiration, the best thing anybody’d said since the murrain.

Gift was in the dairy, having finished the evening milking.  She was straining
the milk and setting out the pans. “Mistress,” said a voice at the door, and she
thought it was the curer and said, “Just a minute while I finish this,” and then
turning saw a stranger and nearly dropped the pan. “Oh, you startled me!” she
said. “What can I do for you, then?”

“I’m looking for a bed for the night.”

“No, I’m sorry, there’s my lodger, and my brother, and me. Maybe San, in the
village-”

“They sent me here. They said, “All the foreigners in one basket.”” The
stranger was in his thirties, with a blunt face and a pleasant look, dressed
plain, though the cob that stood behind him was a good horse. “Put me up in
the cow barn, mistress, it’ll do fine. It’s my horse needs a good bed; he’s 
tired.
I’ll sleep in the barn and be off in the morning. Cows are a pleasure to sleep
with on a cold night. I’ll be glad to pay you, mistress, if two coppers would
suit, and my name’s Hawk.”


“I’m Gift,” she said, a bit flustered, but liking the fellow. “All right, then,
Master Hawk. Put your horse up and see to him. There’s the pump, there’s
plenty   of hay. Come on in the house after. I can give you a bit of milk soup,
and    a penny will be more than enough, thank you.” She didn’t feel like 
calling
him sir, as she always did the curer. This one had nothing of that lordly way
about him. She hadn’t seen a king when she first saw him, as with the other
one.

When she finished in the dairy and went to the house, the new fellow, Hawk,
was squatting on the hearth, skillfully making up the fire. The curer was in his
room asleep. She looked in, and closed the door.

“He’s not too well,” she said, speaking low. “He was curing the cattle away
out east over the marsh, in the cold, for days on end, and wore himself  out.”

As she went about her work in the kitchen, Hawk lent her a hand now and
then in the most natural way, so that she began to wonder if men from foreign
parts were all so much handier about the house than the men of the Marsh. He
was easy to talk with, and she told him about the curer, since there was
nothing much to say about herself.

“They’ll use a sorcerer and then ill-mouth him for his usefulness,” she said.
“It’s not just.”

“But he scared em, somehow, did he?”

“I guess he did. Another curer came up this way, a fellow that’s been by here
before. Doesn’t amount to much that I can see. He did no good to my cow
with the caked bag, two years ago. And his balm’s just pig fat, I’d swear.

Well, so, he says to Otak, you’re taking my business. And maybe Otak says
the same back. And they lose their tempers, and they did some black spells,
maybe. I guess Otak did. But he did no harm to the man at all, but fell down
in        a swoon himself. And now he doesn’t remember any more about it, while
the other man walked away unhurt. And they say every beast he touched is
standing yet, and hale. Ten days he spent out there in the wind and the rain,
touching the beasts and healing them. And you know what the cattleman gave
him? Six pennies! Can you wonder he was a little rageous? But I don’t say...”
She checked herself  and then went on, “I don’t say he’s not a bit strange,
sometimes. The way witches and sorcerers are, I guess. Maybe they have to
be,   dealing with such powers and evils as they do. But he is a true man, and
kind.”

“Mistress,”  said Hawk, “may I tell you a story?”

“Oh, are you a teller? Oh, why didn’t you say so to begin with! Is that what
you are then? I wondered, it being winter and all, and you being on the roads.


But with that horse, I thought you must be a merchant. Can you tell me a
story? It would be the joy of my life, and the longer the better! But drink your
soup first, and let me sit down to hear...”

“I’m not truly a teller, mistress,” he said with his pleasant smile, “but I do
have a story for you.” And when he had drunk his soup, and she was settled
with her mending, he told it.

“In the Inmost Sea, on the Isle of the Wise, on Roke Island, where all magery
is taught, there are nine Masters,” he began.

She closed her eyes in bliss and listened.

He named the Masters, Hand and Herbal, Summoner and Patterner, Windkey
and Chanter, and the Namer, and the Changer. “The Changers and the
Summoner’s are very perilous arts,” he said. “Changing, or transformation,
you    maybe know of, mistress. Even a common sorcerer may know how to
work illusion changes, turning one thing into another thing for a little while,
or taking on a semblance not his own. Have you seen that?”

“Heard of it,” she whispered.

“And sometimes witches and sorcerers will say that they’ve summoned the
dead to speak through them. Maybe a child the parents are grieving for. In the
witch’s hut, in the darkness, they hear it cry, or laugh...”

She nodded.

“Those are spells of illusion only, of seeming. But there are true changes, and
true summonings. And these may be true temptations to the wizard! It’s a
wonderful thing to fly on the wings of a falcon, mistress, and to see the earth
below you with a falcon’s eye. And summoning, which is naming truly, is a
great power. To know the true name is to have power, as you know, mistress.
And the summoner’s art goes straight to that. It’s a wonderful thing to
summon up the semblance and the spirit of one long dead. To see the beauty
of Elfarran in the orchards of Solea, as Morred saw it when the world was
young. ..”

His voice had become very soft, very dark.

“Well, to my story. Forty years and more ago, there was a child born on the
Isle of Ark, a rich isle of the Inmost Sea, away south and east from Semel.
This child was the son of an under-steward in the household of the Lord of
Ark. Not a poor man’s son, but not a child of much account. And the parents
died young. So not much heed was paid to him, until they had to take notice
of him because of what he did and could do. He was an uncanny brat, as they
say. He had powers. He could light a fire or douse it with a word. He could


make pots and pans fly through the air. He could turn a mouse into a pigeon
and set it flying round the great kitchens of the Lord of Ark. And if he was
crossed, or frightened, then he did harm. He turned a kettle of boiling water
over  a cook who had mistreated  him.”

“Mercy,” whispered Gift. She had not sewn a stitch since he began.

“He was only a child, and the wizards of that household can’t have been wise
men, for they used little wisdom or gentleness with him. Maybe they were
afraid of him. They bound his hands and gagged his mouth to keep him from
making spells. They locked him in a cellar room, a room of stone, until they
thought him tamed. Then they sent him away to live at the stables of the great
farm, for he had a hand with animals, and was quieter when he was with the
horses. But he quarreled with a stable boy, and turned the poor lad into a lump
of dung. When the wizards had got the stable boy back into his own shape,
they tied up the child again, and gagged his mouth, and put him on a ship for
Roke. They thought maybe the Masters there could tame him.”

“Poor child,” she murmured.

“Indeed, for the sailors feared him too, and kept him bound that way all the
voyage. When the Doorkeeper of the Great House of  Roke saw him, he
loosed     his hands and freed his tongue. And the first thing the boy did in 
the
Great House, they say, he turned the Long Table of the dining hall upside
down, and soured the beer, and a student who tried to stop him got turned into
a pig for a bit... But the boy had met his match in the Masters.

“They didn’t punish him, but kept his wild powers bound with spells until
they could make him listen and begin to learn. It took them a long time. There
was a rivalrous spirit in him that made him look on any power he did not
have, any thing he did not know, as a threat, a challenge, a thing to fight
against until he could defeat it. There are many boys like that. I was one. But 
I
was lucky. I learned my lesson young.

“Well, this boy did learn at last to tame his anger and control his power. And a
very great power it was. Whatever art he studied came easy to him, too easy,
so that he despised illusion, and weatherworking, and even healing, because
they held no fear, no challenge to him. He saw no virtue in himself  for his
mastery of them. So, after the Archmage  Nemmerle had given him his name,
the boy set his will on the great and dangerous art of summoning. And he
studied with the Master of that art for a long time.

“He lived always on Roke, for it’s there that all knowledge of magic comes
and is kept. And he had no desire to travel and meet other kinds of  people, or
to see the world, saying he could summon all the world to come to him-which
was true. Maybe that’s where the danger of that art lies.


“Now, what is forbidden to the summoner, or any wizard, is to call a living
spirit. We can call to them, yes. We can send to them a voice or a
presentment,   a seeming, of ourself. But we do not summon them, in spirit or
in       flesh, to come to us. Only the dead may we summon. Only the shadows.
You can see why this must be. To summon a living man is to have entire
power over him, body and mind. No one, no matter how strong or wise or
great, can rightly own and use another.

“But the spirit of rivalry worked in the boy as he grew to be a man. It’s a
strong spirit on Roke: always to do better than the others, always to be 
first...
The art becomes a contest, a game. The end becomes a means to an end less
than itself... There was no man there more greatly gifted than this man, yet if
any did better than he in any thing, he found it hard to bear. It frightened 
him,
it galled him.

“There was no place for him among the Masters, since a new Master
Summoner had been chosen, a strong man in his prime, not likely to retire or
die. Among the scholars and other teachers he had a place of honor, but he
wasn’t one of the Nine. He’d been passed over. Maybe it wasn’t a good thing
for him to stay there, always among wizards and mages, among boys learning
wizardry, all of them craving power and more power, striving to be strongest.
At     any rate, as the years went on he became more and more aloof, pursuing
his studies in his tower cell apart from others, teaching few students,  
speaking
little. The Summoner would send gifted students to him, but many of the boys
there scarcely knew of him. In this isolation he began to practice certain arts
that are not well to practice and lead to no good thing.

“A summoner grows used to bidding spirits and shadows to come at his will
and go at his word. Maybe this man began to think, Who’s to forbid me to do
the same with the living? Why have I the power if I cannot use it? So he
began to call the living to him, those at Roke whom he feared, thinking them
rivals, those whose power he was jealous of. When they came to him he took
their power from them for himself, leaving them silent. They couldn’t say
what had happened to them, what had become of their power. They didn’t
know.

“So at last he summoned his own master, the Summoner of Roke, taking him

unawares.

“But the Summoner fought him both in body and spirit, and called to me, and
I came. Together we fought against the will that would destroy us.”

Night had come. Gift’s lamp had flickered out. Only the red glow of the fire
shone on Hawk’s face. It was not the face she had thought it. It was worn, and
hard, and scarred all down one side. The hawk’s face, she thought. She held


still, listening.

“This is not a teller’s tale, mistress. This is not a story you will ever hear
anyone else tell.

“I was new at the business of being Archmage then. And younger than the
man we fought, and maybe not afraid enough of him. It was all the two of us
could do to hold our own against him, there in the silence, in the cell in the
tower. Nobody else knew what was going on. We fought. A long time we
fought. And then it was over. He broke. Like a stick breaking. He was broken.
But he fled away. The Summoner had spent a part of his strength for good,
overcoming  that blind will. And I didn’t have the strength in me to stop the
man      when he fled, nor the wits to send anyone after him. And not a shred of
power left in me to follow him with. So he got away from Roke. Clean gone.

“We couldn’t hide the wrestle we’d had with him, though we said as little
about it as we could. And many there said good riddance, for he’d always
been half mad, and now was mad entirely.

“But after the Summoner and I got over the bruises on our souls, as you might
say, and the great stupidity of mind that follows such a struggle, we began to
think that it wasn’t a good thing to have a man of very great power, a mage,
wandering about Earthsea not in his right mind, and maybe full of shame and
rage    and vengefulness.

“We could find no trace of him. No doubt he changed himself to a bird or a
fish when he left Roke, until he came to some other island. And a wizard can
hide himself from all finding spells. We sent out inquiries, in the ways we
have of doing so, but nothing and nobody replied. So we set off looking for
him, the Summoner to the eastern isles and I to the west. For when I thought
about this man, I had begun to see in my mind’s eye a great mountain,  a
broken cone, with a long, green land beneath it reaching to the south. I
remembered  my geography lessons when I was a boy at Roke, and the lay of
the      land on Semel, and the mountain whose name is Andanden.  So I came to
the High Marsh. I think I came the right way.”

There was a silence. The fire whispered.

“Should I speak to him?” Gift asked in a steady voice.

“No need,” said the man like a falcon. “I will.” And he said, “Irioth.”

She looked at the door of the bedroom. It opened and he stood there, thin and
tired, his dark eyes full of sleep and bewilderment and pain.

“Ged,” he said. He bowed his head. After a while he looked up and asked,
“Will you take my name from me?”


“Why should I do that?”

“It means only hurt. Hate, pride, greed.”

“I’ll take those names from you, Irioth, but not your own.”

“I didn’t understand,” Irioth said, “about the others. That they are other. We
are all other. We must be. I was wrong.”

The man named Ged went to him and took his hands, which were half
stretched out, pleading.

“You went wrong. You’ve come back. But you’re tired, Irioth, and the way’s
hard when you go alone. Come home with me.”

Irioth’s head drooped as if in utter weariness. All tension and passion had
gone out of his body. But he looked up, not at Ged but at Gift, silent in the
hearth corner.

“I have work here,” he said.
Ged too looked at her.

“He does,” she said. “He heals the cattle.”

“They show me what I should do,” Irioth said, “and who I am. They know my
name. But they never say it.”

After a while Ged gently drew the older man to him and held him in his arms.
He said something quietly to him and let him go. Irioth drew a deep breath.

“I’m no good there, you see, Ged,” he said. “I am, here. If they’ll let me do
the work.” He looked again at Gift, and Ged did also. She looked at them
both.

“What say you, Emer?” asked the one like a falcon.

“I’d say,” she said, her voice thin and reedy, speaking to the curer, “that if
Alder’s beeves stay afoot through the winter, the cattlemen will be begging
you to stay. Though they may not love you.”

“Nobody loves a sorcerer,” said the Archmage. “Well, Irioth! Did I come all
this way for you in the dead of winter, and must go back alone?”

“Tell them-tell them I was wrong,” Irioth said. “Tell them I did wrong. Tell
Thorion-” He halted, confused.

“I’ll tell him that the changes in a man’s life may be beyond all the arts we
know, and all our wisdom,” said the Archmage. He looked at Emer again.
“May he stay here, mistress? Is that your wish as well as his?”

“He’s ten times the use and company to me my brother is,” she said. “And a


kind true man, as I told you. Sir.”

“Very well, then. Irioth, my dear companion, teacher, rival, friend, farewell.
Emer, brave woman, my honor and thanks to you. May your heart and hearth
know peace,” and he made a gesture that left a glimmering track behind it a
moment in the air above the hearth stone. “Now I’m off to the cow barn,” he
said, and he was.

The door closed. It was silent except for the whisper of the fire.
“Come to the fire,” she said. Irioth came and sat down on the settle.
“Was that the Archmage? Truly?”

He nodded.

“The Archmage of the world,” she said. “In my cow barn. He should have my
bed-”

“He won’t,” said Irioth.
She knew he was right.

“Your name is beautiful, Irioth,” she said after a while. “I never knew my
husband’s true name. Nor he mine. I won’t speak yours again. But I like to
know it, since you know mine.”

“Your name is beautiful, Emer,” he said. “I will speak it when you tell me to.”


Dragonfly

I.   Iria

Her father’s ancestors had owned a wide, rich domain on the wide, rich island
of Way. Claiming  no title or coun privilege in the days of the kings, through
all the dark years after Maharion fell they held their land and people with firm
hands, putting their gains back into the land, upholding some sort of justice,
and fighting off petty tyrants. As order and peace returned to the Archipelago
under the sway of the wise men of Roke, for a while yet the family and their
farms and villages prospered. That prosperity and the beauty of the meadows
and upland pastures and oak-crowned hills made the domain a byword, so that
people said, “as fat as a cow of Iria’, or, “as lucky as an Irian’. The masters
and many tenants of the domain added its name to their own, calling
themselves Irian. But though the farmers and shepherds went on from season
to     season and year to year and generation to generation as solid and steady 
as
the oaks, the family that owned the land altered with time and chance.

A quarrel between brothers over their inheritance divided them. One heir
mismanaged his estate through greed, the other through foolishness. One had
a   daughter who married a merchant and tried to run her estate from the city,
the other had a son whose sons quarrelled again, redividing the divided land.
By the time the girl called Dragonfly was born, the domain of Iria, though
still one of the loveliest regions of hill and field and meadow in all Earthsea,
was a battleground of feuds and litigations. Farmlands went to weeds,
farmsteads went unroofed, milking sheds stood unused, and shepherds
followed     their flocks over the mountain to better pastures. The old house 
that

had been the centre of the domain was half in ruins on its hill among the oaks.

Its owner was one of four men who called themselves Master of Iria. The
other three called him Master of Old Iria. He spent his youth and what
remained of his inheritance in law courts and the anterooms of the Lords of
Way       in Shelieth, trying to prove his right to the whole domain as it had 
been a
hundred years ago. He came back unsuccessful and embittered and spent his
age drinking the hard red wine from his last vineyard and walking his
boundaries with a troop of ill-treated, underfed dogs to keep interlopers off
his        land.

He had married while he was in Shelieth, a woman no one at Iria knew
anything about, for she came from some other island, it was said, somewhere
in    the west, and she never came to Iria, for she died in childbirth there in 
the
city.


When he came home he had a three-year-old daughter with him. He turned
her over to the housekeeper  and forgot about her. When he was drunk
sometimes  he remembered her. If he could find her, he made her stand by his
chair     or sit on his knees and listen to all the wrongs that had been done 
to him
and to the house of Iria. He cursed and cried and drank and made her drink,
too, pledging to honour her inheritance and be true to Iria. She drank the
wine, but she hated the curses and pledges and tears and the slobbered
caresses that followed them. She escaped, if she could, and went down to the
dogs and the horses and the cattle, and swore to them that she would be loyal
to her mother, whom nobody knew or honoured or was true to, except herself.

When she was thirteen the old vineyarder and the housekeeper, who were all
that was left of the household, told the Master that it was time his daughter
had her naming day. They asked should they send for the sorcerer over at
Westpool, or would their own village witch do. The Master of Iria fell into a
screaming rage. “A village witch? A hex-hag to give Irian’s daughter her true
name?  Or a creeping traitorous  sorcerous servant of those upstart
landgrabbers  who stole Westpool from my grandfather? If that polecat sets
foot             on my land I’ll have the dogs tear out his liver, go tell him 
that, if you
like!” And so on. Old Daisy went back to her kitchen and old Coney went
back    to his vines, and thineen-year-old Dragonfly ran out of the house and
down the hill to the village, hurling her father’s curses at the dogs, who, 
crazy
with excitement at his shouting, barked and bayed and rushed after her.

“Get back, you black-hearted bitch!” she yelled. “Home, you crawling
traitor!” And the dogs fell silent and went sidling back to the house with their
tails down.

Dragonfly found the village witch taking maggots out of an infected cut on a
sheep’s rump. The witch’s use-name was Rose, like a great many women of
Way and other islands of the Hardic Archipelago.  People who have a secret
name that holds their power the way a diamond holds light may well like their
public name to be ordinary, common, like other people’s names.

Rose was muttering a rote spell, but it was her hands and her little short sharp
knife that did most of the work. The ewe bore the digging knife patiently, her
opaque, amber, slotted eyes gazing into silence; only she stamped her small
left front foot now and then, and sighed.

Dragonfly peered close at Rose’s work. Rose brought out a maggot, dropped
it, spat on it, and probed again. The girl leaned up against the ewe, and the
ewe leaned against the girl, giving and receiving comfort. Rose extracted,
dropped, and spat on the last maggot, and said, “Just hand me that bucket
now.”  She bathed the sore with salt water. The ewe sighed deeply and
suddenly walked out of the yard, heading for home. She had had enough of


medicine. “Bucky!” Rose shouted. A grubby child appeared from under a
bush where he had been asleep and trailed after the ewe, of whom he was
nominally in charge although she was older, larger, better fed, and probably
wiser than he was.

“They said you should give me my name,” said Dragonfly. “Father fell to
raging. So that’s that.”

The witch said nothing. She knew the girl was right. Once the Master of Iria
said he would or would not allow a thing he never changed his mind, priding
himself  on his intransigence, since only weak men said a thing and then
unsaid    it.

“Why can’t I give myself  my own true name?” Dragonfly asked, while Rose
washed the knife and her hands in the salt water.

“Can’t be done,”

“Why not? Why does it have to be a witch or a sorcerer? What do you do?”

“Well,” Rose said, and dumped out the salt water on the bare dirt of the small
front yard of her house, which, like most witches’ houses, stood somewhat
apart from the village. “Well,” she said, straightening up and looking about
vaguely as if for an answer, or a ewe, or a towel. “You have to know
something about the power, see,” she said at last, and looked at Dragonfly
with       one eye. Her other eye looked a little off to the side. Sometimes
Dragonfly thought the cast was in Rose’s left eye, sometimes it seemed to be
in       her right, but always one eye looked straight and the other watched
something just out of sight, around the corner, elsewhere.

“Which power?”

“The one,” Rose said. As suddenly as the ewe had walked off, she went into
her house. Dragonfly followed her, but only to the door. Nobody entered a
witch’s house uninvited.

“You said I had it,” the girl said into the reeking gloom of the one-roomed
hut.

“I said you have a strength in you, a great one,” the witch said from the
darkness. “And you know it too. What you are to do I don’t know, nor do you.
That’s to find. But there’s no such power as to name yourself.”

“Why not? What’s more yourself  than your own true name?”
A long silence.

The witch emerged with a soapstone drop-spindle and a ball of  greasy wool.
She sat down on the bench beside her door and set the spindle turning. She


had spun a yard of  grey-brown yarn before she answered.

“My name’s myself. True. But what’s a name, then? It’s what another calls
me. If there was no other, only me, what would I want a name for?”

“But,” said Dragonfly and stopped, caught by the argument. After a while she
said, “So a name has to be a gift?”

Rose nodded.

“Give me my name, Rose,” the girl said.
“Your dad says not.”

“I say to.”

“He’s the Master here.”

“He can keep me poor and stupid and worthless, but he can’t keep me
nameless!”

The witch sighed, like the ewe, uneasy and constrained.

“Tonight,” Dragonfly said. “At our spring, under Iria Hill. What he doesn’t
know won’t hun him.” Her voice was half-coaxing, half-savage.

“You ought to have your proper name day, your feast and dancing, like any
young ‘un,” the witch said. “It’s at daybreak a name should be given. And
then there ought to be music and feasting and all. Not sneaking about at night
and no one knowing...”

“I’ll know. How do you know what name to say, Rose? Does the water tell
you?”

The witch shook her iron-grey head once. “I can’t tell you.” Her ‘can’t’ did
not mean ‘won’t’. Dragonfly waited. “It’s the power, like I said. It comes just
so.” Rose stopped her spinning and looked up with one eye at a cloud in the
west; the other looked a little northward of the sky. “You’re there in the 
water,
together, you and the child. You take away the child-name. People may go on
using that name for a use-name, but it’s not her name, nor ever was. So now
she’s not a child, and she has no name. So then you wait. You open your mind
up, like. Like opening the doors of a house to the wind. So it comes. Your
tongue speaks it, the name. Your breath makes it. You give it to that child, the
breath, the name. You can’t think of it. You let it come to you. It must come
through you to her it belongs to. That’s the power, the way it works. It’s all
like  that. It’s not a thing you do. You have to know how to let it do. That’s 
all
the mastery.”

“Mages can do more than that,” the girl said.


“Nobody can do more than that,” said Rose.

Dragonfly rolled her head round on her neck, stretching till the vertebrae
cracked, stretching out her long arms and legs restlessly. “Will you?” she 
said.

After some time, Rose nodded once.

They met in the lane under Iria Hill in the dark of night, long after sunset,
long before dawn. Rose made a dim glow of werelight so that they could find
their way through the marshy ground around the spring without falling in a
sinkhole among the reeds. In the cold darkness under a few stars and the black
curve of the hill, they stripped and waded into the shallow water, their feet
sinking deep in velvet mud. The witch touched the girl’s hand, saying, “I take
your name, child. You are no child. You have no name.”

It was utterly still.

In a whisper the witch said, “Woman, be named. You are Irian.”

For a moment longer they held still; then the night wind blew across their
naked shoulders, and shivering, they waded out, dried themselves as well as
they could, struggled barefoot and wretched through the sharp-edged reeds
and tangling roots, and found their way back to the lane. And there Dragonfly
spoke in a ragged, raging whisper: ‘How could you name me that!”

The witch said nothing.

“It isn’t right. It isn’t my true name! I thought my name would make me be
me. But this makes it worse. You got it wrong. You’re only a witch. You did it
wrong. It’s his name. He can have it. He’s so proud of it, his stupid domain,
his stupid grandfather. I don’t want it. I won’t have it. It isn’t me. I still 
don’t
know who I am. I’m not Irian!” She fell silent abruptly, having spoken the
name.

The witch still said nothing. They walked along in the darkness side by side.
At last, in a placating, frightened voice, Rose said, “It came so ...”

“If you ever tell it to anyone I’ll kill you,” Dragonfly said.

At that, the witch stopped walking. She hissed like a cat. “Tell anyone?”

Dragonfly stopped too. She said after a moment, “I’m sorry. But I feel like - I
feel like you betrayed me.”

“I spoke your true name. It’s not what I thought it would be. And I don’t feel
easy about it. As if I’d left something  unfinished. But it is your name. If it
betrays you, then that’s the truth of it.” Rose hesitated and then spoke less
angrily, more coldly: ‘If  you want the power to betray me, Irian, I’ll give you
that. My name is Etaudis.”


The wind had come up again. They were both shivering, their teeth chattering.
They stood face to face in the black lane, hardly able to see where the other
was. Dragonfly put out her groping hand and met the witch’s hand. They put
their arms round each other in a fierce, long embrace. Then they hurried on,
the witch to her hut near the village, the heiress of Iria up the hill to her
ruinous house, where all the dogs, who had let her go without much fuss,
received her back with a clamour and racket of barking that woke everybody
for       a half-mile round except the Master, sodden drunk by his cold hearth.

II. Ivory

The Master of Iria of Westpool, Birch, didn’t own the old house, but he did
own the central and richest lands of the old domain. His father, more
interested in vines and orchards than in quarrels with his relatives, had left
Birch     a thriving property. Birch hired men to manage the farms and wineries
and cooperage and cartage and all, while he enjoyed his wealth. He married
the timid daughter of the younger brother of the Lord of Wayfirth, and took
infinite pleasure in thinking that his daughters were of noble blood.

The fashion of the time among the nobility was to have a wizard in their
service, a genuine wizard with a staff  and a grey cloak, trained on the Isle of
the Wise, and so the Master of Iria of Westpool got himself  a wizard from
Roke. He was surprised how easy it was to get one, if you paid the price.

The young man, called Ivory, did not actually have his staff  and cloak yet; he
explained that he was to be made wizard when he went back to Roke. The
Masters had sent him out in the world to gain experience, for all the classes in
the School cannot give a man the experience he needs to be a wizard. Birch
looked a little dubious at this, and Ivory reassured him that his training on
Roke had equipped him with every kind of  magic that could be needed in Iria
of Westpool on Way. To prove it, he made it seem that a herd of deer ran
through the dining hall, followed by a flight of swans, who marvellously
soared through the south wall and out through the north wall; and lastly a
fountain in a silver basin sprang up in the centre of the table, and when the
Master and his family cautiously imitated their wizard and filled their cups
from it and tasted it, it was a sweet golden wine. “Wine of the Andrades,” said
the young man with a modest, complacent smile. By then the wife and
daughters were entirely won over. And Birch thought the young man was
worth his fee, although his own silent preference was for the dry red Fanian of
his own vineyards, which got you drunk if you drank enough, while this
yellow stuff  was just honeywater.

If the young sorcerer was seeking experience, he did not get much at


Westpool. Whenever Birch had guests from Kembermouth or from
neighboring domains, the herd of deer, the swans, and the fountain of golden
wine   made their appearance. He also worked up some very pretty fireworks
for warm spring evenings. But if the managers of the orchards and vineyards
came to the Master to ask if his wizard might put a spell of increase on the
pears this year or maybe charm the black rot off the Fanian vines on the south
hill, Birch said, “A wizard of  Roke doesn’t lower himself  to such stuff. Go 
tell
the village sorcerer to earn his keep!” And when the youngest daughter came
down with a wasting cough, Birch’s wife dared not trouble the wise young
man about it, but sent humbly to Rose of  Old Iria, asking her to come in by
the back door and maybe make a poultice or sing a chant to bring the girl
back to health.

Ivory never noticed that the girl was ailing, nor the pear trees, nor the vines.
He kept himself  to himself, as a man of craft and learning should. He spent
his days riding about the countryside on the pretty black mare that his
employer had given him for his use when he made it clear that he had not
come from Roke to trudge about on foot in the mud and dust of country
byways.

On his rides, he sometimes passed an old house on a hill among great oaks.
When he turned off the village lane up the hill, a pack of scrawny, evil-
mouthed dogs came pelting and bellowing down at him. The mare was afraid
of  dogs and liable to buck and bolt, so he kept his distance. But he had an eye
for beauty, and liked to look at the old house dreaming away in the dappled
light of the early summer afternoons.

He asked Birch about the place. “That’s Iria,” Birch said - “Old Iria, I mean to
say. I own the house by rights. But after a century of feuds and fights over it,
my granddad let the place go to settle the quarrel. Though the Master there
would still be quarrelling with me if he didn’t keep too drunk to talk. Haven’t
seen the old man for years. He had a daughter, I think.”

“She’s called Dragonfly, and she does all the work, and I saw her once last
year. She’s tall, and as beautiful as a flowering tree,” said the youngest
daughter, Rose, who was busy crowding a lifetime of keen observation into
the fourteen years that were all she was going to have for it. She broke off,
coughing. Her mother shot an anguished, yearning glance at the wizard.

Surely he would hear that cough, this time? He smiled at young Rose, and the
mother’s heart lifted. Surely he wouldn’t smile so if Rose’s cough was
anything serious?

“Nothing to do with us, that lot at the old place,” Birch said, displeased. The
tactful Ivory asked no more. But he wanted to see the girl as beautiful as a
flowering tree. He rode past Old Iria regularly. He tried stopping in the 
village


at the foot of the hill to ask questions, but there was nowhere to stop and
nobody would answer questions. A wall-eyed witch took one look at him and
scuttled into her hut. If he went up to the house he would have to face the
pack       of hellhounds and probably a drunk old man. But it was worth the
chance, he thought; he was bored out of his wits with the dull life at
Westpool,    and was never slow to take a risk. He rode up the hill till the 
dogs
were yelling around him in a frenzy, snapping at the mare’s legs. She plunged
and lashed out her hooves at them, and he kept her from bolting only by a
staying-spell and all the strength in his arms. The dogs were leaping and
snapping         at his own legs now, and he was about to let the mare have her 
head
when somebody came among the dogs shouting curses and beating them back
with a strap. When he got the lathered, gasping mare to stand still, he saw the
girl as beautiful as a flowering tree. She was very tall, very sweaty, with big
hands and feet and mouth and nose and eyes, and a head of wild dusty hair.

She was yelling, “Down! Back to the house, you carrion, you vile sons of
bitches!” to the whining, cowering dogs.

Ivory clapped his hand to his right leg. A dog’s tooth had ripped his breeches
at the calf, and a trickle of blood came through.

“Is she hurt?” the woman said. “Oh, the traitorous vermin!” She was stroking
down the mare’s right foreleg. Her hands came away covered with blood-
streaked horse sweat. “There, there,” she said. The brave girl, the brave
heart.”   The mare put her head down and shivered all over with relief. “What
did you keep her standing there in the middle of the dogs for?” the woman
demanded furiously. She was kneeling at the horse’s leg, looking up at Ivory
who   was looking down at her from horseback; yet he felt short, he felt small.

She did not wait for an answer. “I’ll walk her up,” she said, standing up, and
put out her hand for the reins. Ivory saw that he was supposed to dismount.
He did so, asking, “Is it very bad?” and peering at the horse’s leg, seeing only
bright, bloody foam.

“Come on then, my love,” the young woman said, not to him. The mare
followed her trustfully. They set off up the rough path round the hillside to an
old stone and brick stableyard,  empty of horses, inhabited only by nesting
swallows that swooped about over the roofs calling their quick gossip.

“Keep her quiet,” said the young woman, and left him holding the mare’s
reins in this deserted place. She returned after some time lugging a heavy
bucket, and set to sponging  off the mare’s leg. “Get the saddle off her,” she
said,  and her tone held the unspoken, impatient, “you fool!” Ivory obeyed,
half-annoyed by this crude giantess and half-intrigued. She did not put him in
mind        of a flowering tree at all, but she was in fact beautiful, in a 
large, fierce
way. The mare submitted to her absolutely. When she said, “Move your foot!”


the mare moved her foot. The woman wiped her down all over, put the saddle
blanket back on her, and made sure she was standing in the sun. “She’ll be all
right,” she said. “There’s a gash, but if you’ll wash it with warm salt water
four    or five times a day, it’ll heal clean, I’m sorry.” She said the last 
honestly,
though grudgingly, as if she still wondered how he could have let his mare
stand there to be assaulted, and she looked straight at him for the first time.

Her eyes were clear orange-brown,  like dark topaz or amber. They were
strange eyes, right on a level with his own.

“I’m sorry too,” he said, trying to speak carelessly, lightly.
“She’s Irian of Westpool’s mare. You’re the wizard, then?”

He bowed. “Ivory, of Havnor Great Port, at your service. May I -”
She interrupted. “I thought you were from Roke.”

“I am,” he said, his composure regained.

She stared at him with those strange eyes, as unreadable as a sheep’s, he
thought. Then she burst out:  ‘You lived there? You studied there? Do you
know the Archmage?”

“Yes,” he said with a smile. Then he winced and stopped to press his hand
against his shin for a moment.

“Are you hurt too?”

“It’s nothing,” he said. In fact, rather to his annoyance, the cut had stopped
bleeding. The woman’s gaze returned to his face.

“What is it - what is it like - on Roke?”

Ivory went, limping only very slightly, to an old mounting-block nearby and
sat down on it. He stretched his leg, nursing the torn place, and looked up at
the woman. “It would take a long time to tell you what Roke is like,” he said.
“But it would be my pleasure.”

“The man’s a wizard, or nearly,” said Rose the witch, “a Roke wizard! You
must not ask him questions!” She was more than scandalized, she was
frightened.

“He doesn’t mind,” Dragonfly reassured her. “Only he hardly ever really

answers.”

“Of course not!”
“Why of course not?”

“Because he’s a wizard! Because you’re a woman, with no art, no knowledge,
no learning!”


“You could have taught me! You never would!”

Rose dismissed all she had taught or could teach with a flick of the fingers.
“Well, so I have to learn from him,” said Dragonfly.

“Wizards don’t teach women. You’re besotted.”
“You and Broom trade spells.”

“Broom’s a village sorcerer. This man is a wise man. He learned the High
Arts at the Great House on Roke!”

“He told me what it’s like,” Dragonfly said. “You walk up through the town,
Thwil Town. There’s a door opening on the street, but it’s shut. It looks like
an ordinary door.”

The witch listened, unable to resist the lure of secrets revealed and the
contagion of passionate desire.

“And a man comes when you knock, an ordinary-looking man. And he gives
you a test. You have to say a certain word, a password, before he’ll let you in.
If you don’t know it, you can never go in. But if he lets you in, then from
inside you see that the door is entirely different - it’s made out of horn, 
with a
tree carved on it, and the frame is made out of a tooth, one tooth of a dragon
that lived long, long before Erreth-Akbe, before Morred, before there were
people in Earthsea. There were only dragons, to begin with. They found the
tooth on Mount Onn, in Havnor, at the centre of the world. And the leaves of
the tree are carved so thin that the light shines through them, but the door’s 
so
strong that if the Doorkeeper shuts it no spell could ever open it. And then the
Doorkeeper takes you down a hall and another hall, till you’re lost and
bewildered,    and then suddenly you come out under the sky. In the Court of
the  Fountain, in the very deepest inside of the Great House. And that’s where
the Archmage would be, if he was there...”

“Go on,” the witch murmured.

That’s all he really told me, yet,” said Dragonfly, coming back to the mild,
overcast spring day and the infinite familiarity of the village lane, Rose’s 
front
yard, her own seven milch ewes grazing on Iria Hill, the bronze crowns of the
oaks. “He’s very careful how he talks about the Masters.”

Rose nodded.

“But he told me about some of the students.”
“No harm in that, I suppose.”

“I don’t know,” Dragonfly said. “To hear about the Great House is wonderful,
but I thought the people there would be - I don’t know. Of course they’re


mostly just boys when they go there. But I thought they’d be...” She gazed
off at the sheep on the hill, her face troubled. “Some of them are really bad
and stupid,” she said in a low voice. “They get into the School because
they’re rich. And they study there just to get richer. Or to get power.”

“Well, of course they do,” said Rose, “that’s what they’re there for!”

“But power - like you told me about - that .isn’t the same as making people do
what you want, or pay you -”

“Isn’t it?”

“No!”

“If a word can heal, a word can wound,” the witch said. “If a hand can kill, a
hand can cure. It’s a poor cart that goes only in one direction,”

“But on Roke, they learn to use power well, not for harm, not for gain.”

“Everything’s for gain some way, I’d say. People have to live. But what do I
know? I make my living doing what I know how to do. But I don’t meddle
with the great arts, the perilous crafts, like summoning the dead,” and Rose
made the hand-sign to avert the danger spoken of.

“Everything’s  perilous,” Dragonfly said, gazing now through the sheep, the
hill, the trees, into still depths, a colorless, vast emptiness like the clear 
sky
before sunrise.

Rose watched her. She knew she did not know who Man was or what she
might be. A big, strong, awkward, ignorant, innocent, angry woman, yes. But
ever since she was a child Rose had seen something more in her, something
beyond what she was. And when Irian looked away from the world like that,
she seemed to enter that place or time or being beyond herself, utterly beyond
Rose’s knowledge. Then Rose feared her, and feared for her.

“You take care,” the witch said, grim. “Everything’s  perilous, right enough,
and meddling with wizards most of  all.”

Through love, respect, and trust, Dragonfly would never disregard a warning
from Rose; but she was unable to see Ivory as perilous. She didn’t understand
him, but the idea of fearing him, him personally, was not one she could keep
in mind. She tried to be respectful, but it was impossible. She thought he was
clever and quite handsome, but she didn’t think much about him, except for
what he could tell her. He knew what she wanted to know and little by little
he told it to her, and then it was not really what she had wanted to know, but
she wanted to know more. He was patient with her, and she was grateful to
him for his patience, knowing he was much quicker than she. Sometimes he
smiled at her ignorance, but he never sneered at it or reproved it. Like the


witch, he liked to answer a question with a question; but the answers to
Rose’s questions were always something she’d always known, while the
answers to his questions were things she had never imagined and found
startling, unwelcome,  even painful, altering all her beliefs.

Day by day, as they talked in the old stableyard of Iria, where they had fallen
into the habit of meeting, she asked him and he told her more, though
reluctantly, always partially; he shielded his Masters, she thought, trying to
defend    the bright image of Roke, until one day he gave in to her insistence
and spoke freely at last.

“There are good men there,” he said. “Great and wise the Archmage certainly
was. But he’s gone. And the Masters  ...  Some hold aloof, following arcane
knowledge,  seeking ever more patterns, ever more names, but using their
knowledge  for nothing. Others hide their ambition under the grey cloak of
wisdom. Roke is no longer where power is in Earthsea. That’s the Court in
Havnor, now. Roke lives on its great past, defended by a thousand spells
against    the present day. And inside those spell-walls, what is there?

Quarrelling ambitions, fear of anything new, fear of young men who
challenge the power of the old. And at the centre, nothing. An empty
courtyard. The Archmage will never return.”

“How do you know?” she whispered.

He looked stern. The dragon bore him away.”

“You saw it? You saw that?” She clenched her hands, imagining that flight.

After a long time, she came back to the sunlight and the stableyard and her
thoughts and puzzles. “But even if he’s gone,” she said, “surely some of the
Masters are truly wise?”

When he looked up and spoke it was with a hint of a melancholy smile. “All
the mystery and wisdom of the Masters, when it’s out in the daylight, doesn’t
amount to so much, you know. Tricks of the trade - wonderful illusions. But
people don’t want to believe that. They want the mysteries, the illusions. Who
can blame them? There’s so little in most lives that’s beautiful or worthy.”

As if to illustrate what he was saying, he had picked up a bit of brick from the
broken pavement, and tossed it up in the air, and as he spoke it fluttered about
their heads on delicate blue wings, a butterfly. He put out his finger and the
butterfly lighted on it. He shook his finger and the butterfly fell to the 
ground,
a fragment of brick.

“There’s not much worth much in my life,” she said, gazing down at the
pavement. “All I know how to do is run the farm, and try to stand up and
speak truth. But if I thought it was all tricks and lies even on Roke, I’d hate


those men for fooling me, fooling us all. It can’t be lies. Not all of it. The
Archmage did go into the labyrinth among the Hoary Men and come back
with      the Ring of  Peace. He did go into death with the young king, and 
defeat
the spider mage, and come back. We know that on the word of the king
himself. Even here, the harpers came to sing that song, and a teller came to
tell    it.”

Ivory nodded gravely. “But the Archmage lost all his power in the land of
death. Maybe all magery was weakened then.”

“Rose’s spells work as well as ever,” she said stoutly.

Ivory smiled. He said nothing, but she knew how petty the doings of a village
witch appeared to him, who had seen great deeds and powers. She sighed and
spoke from her heart - “Oh, if only I wasn’t a woman!”

He smiled again. “You’re a beautiful woman,” he said, but plainly, not in the
flattering way he had used with her at first, before she showed him she hated
it. “Why would you be a man?”

“So I could go to Roke! And see, and learn! Why, why is it only men can go
there?”

“So it was ordained by the first Archmage, centuries ago,” said Ivory. “But ...
I too have wondered.”

“You have?”

“Often. Seeing only boys and men, day after day, in the Great House and all
the precincts of the School. Knowing that the townswomen are spell-bound
from so much as setting foot on the fields about Roke Knoll. Once in years,
perhaps, some great lady is allowed to come briefly into the outer courts.

Why is it so? Are all women incapable of understanding? Or is it that the
Masters fear them, fear to be corrupted - no, but fear that to admit women
might change the rule they cling to - the      purity of that rule.”

“Women can live chaste as well as men can,” Dragonfly said bluntly. She
knew she was blunt and coarse where he was delicate and subtle, but she did
not know any other way to be.

“Of course,” he said, his smile growing brilliant. “But witches aren’t always
chaste, are they? Maybe that’s what the Masters are afraid of. Maybe celibacy
isn’t as necessary as the Rule of Roke teaches. Maybe it’s not a way of
keeping the power pure, but of keeping the power to themselves. Leaving out
women, leaving out everybody who won’t agree to turn himself  into a eunuch
to   get that one kind of  power ...  Who knows? A she-mage!  Now that would
change everything, all the rules!”


She could see his mind dance ahead of hers, taking up and playing with ideas,
transforming  them as he had transformed brick into butterfly. She could not
dance with him, she could not play with him, but she watched him in wonder.

“You could go to Roke,” he said, his eyes bright with excitement, mischief,
daring. Meeting her almost pleading, incredulous silence, he insisted: ‘You
could. A woman you are, but there are ways to change your seeming. You
have the heart, the courage, the will of a man. You could enter the Great
House. I know it.”

“And what would I do there?”

“What all the students do. Live alone in a stone cell and learn to be wise! It
might not be what you dream it to be, but that, too, you’d learn.”

“I couldn’t. They’d know. I couldn’t even get in. There’s the Doorkeeper, you
said. I don’t know the word to say to him.”

The password, yes. But I can teach it to you.”
“You can? Is it allowed?”

“I don’t care what’s “allowed”,” he said, with a frown she had never seen on
his face. The Archmage himself  said, Rules are made to he broken. Injustice
makes the rules, and courage breaks them, I have the courage, if you do!”

She looked at him. She could not speak. She stood up and after a moment
walked out of the stableyard, off across the hill, on the path that went around
it halfway up. One of the dogs, her favorite, a big, ugly, heavy-headed hound,
followed her. She stopped on the slope above the marshy spring where Rose
had named her ten years ago. She stood there; the dog sat down beside her
and looked up at her face. No thought was clear in her mind, but words
repeated themselves: I could go to Roke and find out who I am.

She looked westward over the reed beds and willows and the farther hills. The
whole western sky was empty, clear. She stood still and her soul seemed to go
into that sky and be gone, gone out of her.

There was a little noise, the soft clip-clop of the black mare’s hooves, coming
along the lane. Then Dragonfly came back to herself  and called to Ivory and
ran down the hill to meet him. “I will go,” she said.

He had not planned or intended any such adventure, but crazy as it was, it
suited him better the more he thought about it. The prospect of spending the
long grey winter at Westpool sank his spirits like a stone. There was nothing
here for him except the girl Dragonfly, who had come to fill his thoughts. Her
massive, innocent strength had defeated him absolutely so far, but he did what
she pleased in order to have her do at last what he pleased, and the game, he


thought, was worth playing. If she ran away with him, the game was as good
as won. As for the joke of it, the notion of actually getting her into the 
School
on Roke disguised as a man, there was little chance of  pulling it off, but it
pleased him as a gesture of disrespect to all the piety and pomposity of the
Masters and their toadies. And if somehow it succeeded, if he could actually
get      a woman through that door, even for a moment, what a sweet revenge it
would be!

Money was a problem. The girl thought, of course, that he as a great wizard
would snap his fingers and waft them over the sea in a magic boat flying
before the magewind. But when he told her they’d have to hire passage on a
ship, she said simply, “I have the cheese money.”

He treasured her rustic sayings of that kind. Sometimes she frightened him,
and he resented it. His dreams of her were never of her yielding to him, but of
himself  yielding to a fierce, destroying sweetness, sinking into an 
annihilating
embrace, dreams in which she was something beyond comprehension  and he
was nothing at all. He woke from those dreams shaken and shamed. In
daylight, when he saw her big, dirty hands, when she talked like a yokel, a
simpleton, he regained his superiority. He only wished there were someone to
repeat her sayings to, one of his old friends in the Great Port who would find
them amusing. “”I have the cheese money,”” he repeated to himself, riding
back to Westpool, and laughed. “I do indeed,” he said aloud. The black mare
nicked her ear.

He told Birch that he had received a sending from his teacher on Roke, the
Master Hand, and must go at once, on what business he could not say, of
course, but it should not take long once he was there; a half-month to go,
another  to return; he would be back well before the Fallows at the latest. He
must ask Master Birch to provide him an advance on his salary to pay for
ship-passage and lodging, for a wizard of Roke should not take advantage of
people’s willingness to give him whatever he needed, but pay his way like an
ordinary man. As Birch agreed with this, he had to give Ivory a purse for his
journey. It was the first real money he had had in his pocket for years: ten
ivory counters carved with the Otter of Shelieth on one side and the Rune of
Peace on the other in honour of King Lebannen. “Hello, little namesakes,” he
told them when he was alone with them. “You and the cheese money will get
along nicely.”

He told Dragonfly very little of his plans, largely because he made few,
trusting to chance and his own wits, which seldom let him down if he was
given  a fair chance to use them. The girl asked almost no questions. “Will I
go as a man all the way?” was one.

“Yes,” he said, “but only disguised. I won’t put a semblance-spell on you till


we’re on Roke Island.”

“I thought it would be a spell of Change,” she said.

That would be unwise,” he said, with a good imitation of the Master
Changer’s terse solemnity. “If need be, I’ll do it, of course. But you’ll find
wizards very sparing of the great spells. For good reason.”

The Equilibrium,” she said, accepting all he said in its simplest sense, as
always.

“And perhaps because such arts have not the power they once had,” he said.
He did not know himself why he tried to weaken her faith in wizardry;
perhaps because any weakening  of her strength,  her wholeness, was a gain for
him. He had begun merely by trying to get her into his bed, a game he loved
to play. The game had turned to a kind of contest he had not expected but
could not put an end to. He was determined  now not to win her, but to defeat
her. He could not let her defeat him. He must prove to her and himself that his
dreams were meaningless.

Quite early on, impatient with wooing her massive physical indifference,  he
had worked up a charm, a sorcerer’s seduction-spell of which he was
contemptuous  even as he made it, though he knew it was effective. He cast it
on             her while she was, characteristically, mending a cow’s halter. 
The result
had not been the melting eagerness it had produced in girls he had used it on
in Havnor and Thwil. Dragonfly had gradually become silent and sullen. She
ceased asking her endless questions about Roke and did not answer when he
spoke. When he very tentatively approached her, taking her hand, she struck
him away with a blow to the head that left him dizzy. He saw her stand up and
stride out of the stableyard without a word, the ugly hound she favoured
trotting after her. It looked back at him with a grin.

She took the path to the old house. When his ears stopped ringing he stole
after her, hoping the charm was working and that this was only her
particularly uncouth way of leading him at last to her bed. Nearing the house,
he    heard crockery breaking. The father, the drunkard, came wobbling out
looking scared and confused,  followed by Dragonfly’s  loud, harsh voice -
“Out     of the house, you drunken, crawling traitor! You foul, shameless
lecher!”

“She took my cup away,” the Master of Iria said to the stranger, whining like
a puppy, while his dogs yammered around him. “She broke it.”

Ivory departed. He did not return for two days. On the third day he rode
experimentally past Old Iria, and she came striding down to meet him. “I’m
sorry,  Ivory,” she said, looking up at him with her smoky orange eyes. “I


don’t know what came over me the other day. I was angry. But not at you. I
beg your pardon.”

He forgave her gracefully. He did not try a love-charm on her again.

Soon, he thought now, he would not need one. He would have real power over
her. He had finally seen how to get it. She had given it into his hands. Her
strength and her willpower were tremendous, but fonunately she was stupid,
and    he was not.

Birch was sending a carter down to Kembermouth with six barrels of ten-
year-old Fanian ordered by the wine merchant there. He was glad to send his
wizard along as bodyguard, for the wine was valuable, and though the young
king was putting things to rights as fast as he could, there were still gangs of
robbers on the roads. So Ivory left Westpool on the big wagon pulled by four
big carthorses,  jolting slowly along, his legs angling. Down by Jackass Hill an
uncouth figure rose up from the wayside and asked the carter for a lift. “I
don’t  know you,” the carter said, lifting his whip to warn the stranger off, 
but
Ivory came round the wagon and said, “Let the lad ride, my good man. He’ll
do  no harm while I’m with you.”

“Keep an eye on him then, master,” said the carter.

“I will,” said Ivory, with a wink at Dragonfly. She, well disguised in dirt and 
a
farmhand’s old smock and leggings and a loathsome felt hat, did not wink
back. She played her part even while they sat side by side dangling their legs
over the tailgate, with six great halftuns of wine jolting between them and the
drowsy carter, and the drowsy summer hills and fields slipping slowly, slowly
past. Ivory tried to tease her, but she only shook her head. Maybe she was
scared by this wild scheme, now she was embarked on it. There was no
telling. She was solemnly, heavily silent. I could be very bored by this
woman, Ivory thought, if once I’d had her underneath me. That thought
stirred him almost unbearably, but when he looked back at her, his thoughts
died away before her massive, actual presence.

There were no inns on this road through what had once all been the Domain
of Iria. As the sun neared the western plains, they stopped at a farmhouse that
offered stabling for the horses, a shed for the cart, and straw in the stable 
loft
for  the carters. The loft was dark and stuffy and the straw musty. Ivory felt 
no
lust at all, though Dragonfly lay not three feet from him. She had played the
man so thoroughly all day that she had half-convinced even him. Maybe
she’ll fool the old men after all! he thought, and grinned at the thought, and
slept.

They jolted on all the next day through a summer thundershower  or two and
carne at dusk to Kembermouth, a walled, prosperous  port city. They left the


carter to his master’s business and walked down to find an inn near the docks.
Dragonfly looked about at the sights of the city in a silence that might have
been awe or disapproval or mere stolidity. “This is a nice little town,” Ivory
said, “but the only city in the world is Havnor.”

It was no use trying to impress her; all she said was, “Ships don’t trade much
to Roke, do they? Will it take a long time to find one to take us, do you
think?”

“Not if I carry a staff,” he said.

She stopped looking about and strode along in thought for a while. She was
beautiful in movement, bold and graceful, her head carried high.

“You mean they’ll oblige a wizard? But you aren’t a wizard.”

“That’s a formality. We senior sorcerers may carry a staff  when we’re on
Roke’s business. Which I am.”

Taking me there?”

“Bringing them a student - yes. A student of  great gifts!”

She asked no more questions. She never argued; it was one of her virtues.

That night, over supper at the waterfront inn, she asked with unusual timidity
in her voice, “Do I have great gifts?”

“In my judgment, you do,” he said.

She pondered - conversation with her was often a slow business - and said,
“Rose always said I had power, but she didn’t know what kind. And I ...  I
know I do, but I don’t know what it is.”

“You’re going to Roke to find out,” he said, raising his glass to her. After a
moment she raised hers and smiled at him, a smile so tender and radiant that
he said spontaneously, “And may what you find be all you seek!”

“If I do, it will be thanks to you,” she said. In that moment he loved her for
her true heart, and would have forsworn any thought of her but as his
companion in a bold adventure, a gallant joke.

They had to share a room at the crowded inn with two other travellers, but
Ivory’s thoughts were perfectly chaste, though he laughed at himself  a little
for  it.

Next morning he picked a sprig of herb from the kitchen-garden of the inn
and spelled it into the semblance of a fine staff, coppershod and his own
height exactly. “What is the wood?” Dragonfly asked, fascinated, when she
saw it, and when he answered with a laugh, “Rosemary,”  she laughed too.


They set off along the wharves, asking for a ship bound south that might take
a wizard and his prentice to the Isle of the Wise, and soon enough they found
a heavy trader bound for Wathort, whose master would carry the wizard for
goodwill and the prentice for half-price. Even half-price was half  the cheese
money, but they would have the luxury of a cabin, for Sea Otter was a decked,
two-masted ship.

As they were talking with her master a wagon drew up on the dock and began
to unload six familiar halftun barrels. That’s ours,” Ivory said, and the ship’s
master said, “Bound for Hon Town,” and Dragonfly said softly, “From Iria.”

She glanced back at the land then. It was the only time he ever saw her look
back.

The ship’s weatherworker  came aboard just before they sailed, no Roke
wizard but a weatherbeaten  fellow in a worn sea-cloak. Ivory flourished his
staff  a little in greeting him. The sorcerer looked him up and down and said,
“One man works weather on this ship. If it’s not me, I’m off.”

“I’m a mere passenger, Master Bagman. I gladly leave the winds in your
hands.”

The sorcerer looked at Dragonfly, who stood straight as a tree and said
nothing.

“Good,” he said, and that was the last word he spoke to Ivory.

During the voyage, however, he talked several times with Dragonfly, which
made Ivory a bit uneasy. Her ignorance and trustfulness  could endanger her
and therefore him. What did she and the bagman talk about? he asked, and
she answered, “What is to become of us.”

He stared.

“Of all of us. Of Way, and Felkway, and Havnor, and Wathort, and Roke. All
the people of the islands. He says that when King Lebannen was to be
crowned, last autumn, he sent to Gont for the old Archmage to come crown
him,   and he wouldn’t come. And there was no new Archmage. So he took the
crown himself. And some say that’s wrong, and he doesn’t rightly hold the
throne. But others say the king himself  is the new Archmage. But he isn’t a
wizard, only a king. So others say the dark years will come again, when there
was no rule of  justice, and wizardry was used for evil ends.”

After a pause Ivory said, “That old weatherworker  says all this?”

“It’s common talk, I think,” said Dragonfly, with her grave simplicity.

The weatherworker  knew his trade, at least. Sea Otter sped south; they met
summer squalls and choppy seas, but never a storm or a troublesome wind.


They put off and took on cargo at ports on the north shore of O, at Ilien, Leng,
Kamery, and O Port, and then headed west to carry the passengers to Roke.

And facing the west Ivory felt a little hollow at the pit of his stomach, for he
knew all too well how Roke was guarded. He knew neither he nor the
weatherworker  could do anything at all to turn the Roke-wind if it blew
against         them. And if it did. Dragonfly would ask why? Why did it blow
against them?

He was glad to see the sorcerer uneasy too, standing by the helmsman,
keeping a watch up on the masthead, taking in sail at the hint of a west wind.
But   the wind held steady from the north. A thunder-squall came pelting on
that wind, and Ivory went down to the cabin, but Dragonfly stayed up on
deck. She was afraid of the water, she had told him. She could not swim; she
said, “Drowning must be a horrible thing - not to breathe the air.” She had
shuddered at the thought. It was the only fear she had ever shown of anything.
But    she disliked the low, cramped cabin, and had stayed on deck every day
and slept there on the warm nights. Ivory had not tried to coax her into the
cabin. He knew now that coaxing was no good. To have her he must master
her; and that he would do, if only they could come to Roke.

He came up on deck again. It was clearing, and as the sun set the clouds broke
all across the west, showing a golden sky behind the high dark curve of a hill.

Ivory looked at that hill with a kind of longing hatred.

“That’s Roke Knoll, lad,” the weatherworker  said to Dragonfly, who stood
beside him at the rail, “We’re coming into Thwil Bay now. Where there’s no
wind but the wind they want.”

By the time they were well into the bay and had let down the anchor it was
dark, and Ivory said to the ship’s master, “I’ll go ashore in the morning.”

Down in their tiny cabin Dragonfly sat waiting for him, solemn as ever but
her eyes blazing with excitement. “We’ll go ashore in the morning,” he
repeated to her, and she nodded, acceptant.

She said, “Do I look all right?”

He sat down on his narrow bunk and looked at her sitting on her narrow bunk;
they could not face each other directly, as there was no room for their knees.

At O Port she had bought herself a decent shirt and breeches, at his
suggestion,  so as to look a more probable candidate for the School. Her face
was windburned and scrubbed clean. Her hair was braided and the braid
clubbed, like Ivory’s. She had got her hands clean, too, and they lay flat on
her thighs, long strong hands, like a man’s.

“You don’t look like a man,” he said. Her face fell. “Not to me. You’ll never


look like a man to me. But don’t worry. You will to them.”
She nodded, with an anxious face.

The first test is the great test, Dragonfly,”  he said. Every night he lay 
alone in
this cabin he had planned this conversation.  “To enter the Great House: to go
through that door.”

“I’ve been thinking about it,” she said, hurried and earnest. “Couldn’t I just
tell them who I am? With you there to vouch for me - to say even if I am a
woman, I have some gift - and I’d promise to take the vow and make the spell
of celibacy, and live apart if they wanted me to -”

He was shaking his head all through her speech. “No, no, no, no. Hopeless.
Useless. Fatal!”

“Even if you -”

“Even if I argued for you. They won’t listen. The Rule of  Roke forbids
women to be taught any high art, any word of the Language of the Making.
It’s always been so. They will not listen. So they must be shown! And we’ll
show them, you and I. We’ll teach them. You must have courage, Dragonfly.
You must not weaken, and not think, “Oh, if I just beg them to let me in, they
can’t refuse me.” They can, and will. And if you reveal yourself, they will
punish you. And me.” He put a ponderous emphasis on the last word, and
inwardly murmured, “Avert.”

She gazed at him from her unreadable eyes, and finally said, “What must I
do?”

“Do you trust me, Dragonfly?”
“Yes.”

“Will you trust me entirely, wholly - knowing that the risk I take for you is
greater even than your risk in this venture?”

“Yes.”

“Then you must tell me the word you will speak to the Doorkeeper.”
She stared. “But I thought you’d tell it to me - the password.”

“The password he will ask you for is your true name.”

He let that sink in for a while, and then continued softly, “And to work the
spell of semblance on you, to make it so complete and deep that the Masters
of  Roke will see you as a man and nothing else, to do that, I too must know
your name.” He paused again. As he talked it seemed to him that everything
he said was true, and his voice was moved and gentle as he said, “I could


have known it long ago. But I chose not to use those arts. I wanted you to
trust me enough to tell me your name yourself.”

She was looking down at her hands, clasped now on her knees. In the faint
reddish glow of the cabin lantern her lashes cast very delicate, long shadows
on her cheeks. She looked up, straight at him. “My name is Irian,” she said.

He smiled. She did not smile.

He said nothing. In fact he was at a loss. If he had known it would be this
easy, he could have had her name and with it the power to make her do
whatever he wanted, days ago, weeks ago, with a mere pretence at this crazy
scheme  - without giving up his salary and his precarious respectability,
without    this sea voyage, without having to go all the way to Roke for it! For
he    saw the whole plan now was folly. There was no way he could disguise her
that would fool the Doorkeeper for a moment. All his notions of humiliating
the Masters as they had humiliated him were moonshine. Obsessed with
tricking the girl, he had fallen into the trap he laid for her. Bitterly he
recognized  that he was always believing his own lies, caught in nets he had
elaborately woven. Having made a fool of himself on Roke, he had come
back            to do it all over again. A great, desolate anger swelled up in 
him. There
was no good, no good in anything.

“What’s wrong?” she asked. The gentleness of her deep, husky voice
unmanned him, and he hid his face in his hands, fighting against the shame of
tears.

She put her hand on his knee. It was the first time she had ever touched him.
He endured it, the warmth and weight of her touch that he had wasted so
much time wanting.

He wanted to hurt her, to shock her out of her terrible, ignorant kindness, but
what he said when he finally spoke was, “I only wanted to make love to you,”

“You did?”

“Did you think I was one of their eunuchs? That I’d castrate myself with
spells so I could be holy? Why do you think I don’t have a staff? Why do you
think I’m not at the School? Did you believe everything I said?”

“Yes,” she said. “I’m sorry.” Her hand was still on his knee. She said, “We
can make love if you want.”

He sat up, sat still.

“What are you?” he said to her at last.

“I don’t know. It’s why I wanted to come to Roke. To find out.”


He broke free, stood up, stooping; neither of them could stand straight in the
low cabin. Clenching and unclenching his hands, he stood as far from her as
he could, his back to her.

“You won’t find out. It’s all lies, shams. Old men playing games with words. I
wouldn’t play their games, so I left. Do you know what I did?” He turned,
showing his teeth in a rictus of triumph. “I got a girl, a town girl, to come to
my room. My cell. My little stone celibate cell. It had a window looking out
on a back-street.  No spells - you can’t make spells with all their magic going
on. But she wanted to come, and came, and I let a rope ladder out the window,
and she climbed it. And we were at it when the old men came in! I showed
‘em! And if I could have got you in, I’d have showed ‘em again, I’d have
taught them their lesson!”

“Well, I’ll try,” she said.
He stared.

“Not for the same reasons as you,” she said, “but I still want to. And we came
all this way. And you know my name.”

It was true. He knew her name: Irian. It was like a coal of fire, a burning
ember in his mind. His thought could not hold it. His knowledge could not
use it. His tongue could not say it.

She looked up at him, her sharp, strong face softened by the shadowy lantern-
light. “If it was only to make love you brought me here, Ivory,” she said, “we
can do that. If you still want to.”

Wordless at first, he simply shook his head. After a while he was able to
laugh. “I think we’ve gone on past .. . that possibility ...”

She looked at him without regret, or reproach, or shame.

“Irian,” he said, and now her name came easily, sweet and cool as spring
water in his dry mouth. “Irian, here’s what you must do to enter the Great
House. ..”

III.            Azver

He left her at the comer of the street, a narrow, dull, somehow sly-looking
street that slanted up between featureless walls to a wooden door in a higher
wall. He had put his spell on her, and she looked like a man, though she did
not feel like one. She and Ivory took each other in their arms, because after 
all
they had been friends, companions, and he had done all this for her.
“Courage!”  he said, and let her go. She walked up the street and stood before
the     door. She looked back then, but he was gone.


She knocked.

After a while she heard the latch rattle. The door opened. An ordinary-looking
middle-aged man stood there. “What can I do for you?” he said. He did not
smile,       but his voice was pleasant.

“You can let me into the Great House, sir.”

“Do you know the way in?” His almond-shaped  eyes were attentive, yet
seemed to look at her from miles or years away.

“This is the way in, sir.”

“Do you know whose name you must tell me before I let you in?”
“My own, sir. It is Irian.”

“Is it?” he said.

That gave her pause. She stood silent. “It’s the name the witch Rose of my
village on Way gave me, in the spring under Iria Hill,” she said at last,
standing up and speaking truth.

The Doorkeeper looked at her for what seemed a long time. Then it is your
name,” he said. “But maybe not all your name. I think you have another.”

“I don’t know it, sir.”

After another long time she said, “Maybe I can learn it here, sir.”

The Doorkeeper bowed his head a little. A very faint smile made crescent
curves in his cheeks. He stood aside. “Come in, daughter,” he said.

She stepped across the threshold of the Great House.

Ivory’s spell of semblance dropped away like a cobweb. She was and looked
herself.

She followed the Doorkeeper down a stone passageway. Only at the end of it
did she think to turn back to see the light shine through the thousand leaves of
the tree carved in the high door in its bone-white frame.

A young man in a grey cloak hurrying down the passageway stopped short as
he approached them. He stared at Irian; then with a brief  nod he went on. She
looked back at him. He was looking back at her.

A globe of misty, greenish fire drifted swiftly down the corridor at eye level,
apparently pursuing the young man. The Doorkeeper waved his hand at it,
and it avoided him. Irian swerved and ducked down frantically, but felt the
cool fire tingle in her hair as it passed over her. The Doorkeeper looked
round, and now his smile was wider. Though he said nothing, she felt he was


aware of her, concerned for her. She stood up and followed him.

He stopped before an oak door. Instead of knocking he sketched a little sign
or rune on it with the top of his staff, a light staff  of some greyish wood. 
The
door opened as a resonant voice behind it said, “Come in!”

“Wait here a little, if you please, Irian,” the Doorkeeper said, and went into
the room, leaving the door wide open behind him. She could see bookshelves
and books, a table piled with more books and inkpots and writings, two or
three boys seated at the table, and the grey-haired, stocky man the Doorkeeper
spoke to. She saw the man’s face change, saw his eyes shift to her in a brief,
startled gaze, saw him question the Doorkeeper, low-voiced, intense.

They both came to her. “The Master Changer of Roke: Irian of Way,” said the
Doorkeeper.

The Changer stared openly at her. He was not as tall as she was. He stared at
the Doorkeeper, and then at her again.

“Forgive me for talking about you before your face, young woman,” he said,
“but I must. Master Doorkeeper, you know I’d never question your judgment,
but the Rule is clear. I have to ask what moved you to break it and let her
come in.”

“She asked to,” said the Doorkeeper.
“But...” The Changer paused.

“When did a woman last ask to enter the School?”
“They know the Rule doesn’t allow them.”

“Did you know that, Irian?” the Doorkeeper asked her.
“Yes, sir.”

“So what brought you here?” the Changer asked, stern, but not hiding his
curiosity.

“Master Ivory said I could pass for a man. Though I thought I should say who
I was. I will be as celibate as anyone, sir.”

Two long curves appeared on the Doorkeeper’s  cheeks, enclosing the slow
upturn of his smile. The Changer’s face remained stern, but he blinked, and
after a little thought said, “I’m sure - yes - it was definitely the better 
plan to
be honest. What Master did you speak of?”

“Ivory,” said the Doorkeeper. “A lad from Havnor Great Port, whom I let in
three years ago, and let out again last year, as you may recall.”

“Ivory! That fellow that studied with the Hand? Is he here?” the Changer


demanded of Irian, wrathily. She stood straight and said nothing.
“Not in the School,” the Doorkeeper said, smiling.

“He fooled you, young woman. Made a fool of you by trying to make fools of
us.”

“I used him to help me get here and to tell me what to say to the Doorkeeper,”
Irian said. “I’m not here to fool anybody, but to learn what I need to know.”

“I’ve often wondered why I let the boy in,” said the Doorkeeper. “Now I
begin to understand,”

At that the Changer looked at him, and after pondering said soberly,
“Doorkeeper, what have you in mind?”

“I think Irian of Way may have come to us seeking not only what she needs to
know, but also what we need to know.” The Doorkeeper’s tone was equally
sober, and his smile was gone. “I think this may be a matter for talk among
the nine of  us.”

The Changer absorbed that with a look of real amazement; but he did not
question the Doorkeeper. He said only, “But not among the students.”

The Doorkeeper shook his head, agreeing.

“She can lodge in the town,” the Changer said, with some relief.
“While we talk behind her back?”

“You won’t bring her into the Council Room?” the Changer said in disbelief.
“The Archmage brought the boy Arren there.”

“But - but Arren was King Lebannen -”
“And who is Irian?”

The Changer stood silent, and then he said quietly, with respect, “My friend,
what is it you think to do, to learn? What is she, that you ask this for her?”

“Who are we,” said the Doorkeeper,  “that we refuse her without knowing
what she is?”

“A woman,” said the Master Summoner.

Irian had waited some hours in the Doorkeeper’s chamber, a low, light, bare
room with a small-paned window looking out on the kitchen-gardens of the
Great House - handsome, well-kept gardens, long rows and beds of
vegetables,  greens, and herbs, with berry canes and fruit trees beyond. She
saw             a burly, dark-skinned man and two boys come out and weed one of 
the
vegetable plots. It eased her mind to watch their careful work. She wished she


could help them at it. The waiting and the strangeness were very difficult.
Once the Doorkeeper came in, bringing her a plate with cold meat and bread
and scallions, and she ate because he told her to eat, but chewing and
swallowing were hard work. The gardeners went away and there was nothing
to     watch out the window but the cabbages growing and the sparrows hopping,
and now and then a hawk far up in the sky, and the wind moving softly in the
tops of tall trees, on beyond the gardens.

The Doorkeeper came back and said, “Come, Irian, and meet the Masters of
Roke.” Her heart began to go at a carthorse gallop. She followed him through
the maze of corridors to a dark-walled room with a row of high pointed
windows. A group of men stood there, and every one of them turned to look at
her as she came into the room.

“Irian of Way, my lords,” said the Doorkeeper.  They were all silent. He
motioned her to come fanher into the room. “The Master Changer you have
met,”    he said. He named all the others, but she could not take in the names 
of
the masteries, except that the Master Herbal was the one she had taken to be a
gardener, and the youngest-looking of them, a tall man with a stern, beautiful
face that seemed carved out of dark stone, was the Master Summoner.  It was
he who spoke, when the Doorkeeper was done. “A woman,” he said.

The Doorkeeper nodded once, mild as ever.

“This is what you brought the Nine together for? This and no more?”
“This and no more,” said the Doorkeeper.

“Dragons have been seen flying above the Inmost Sea. Roke has no
Archmage, and the islands no true-crowned  king. There is real work to do,”
the Summoner said, and his voice too was like stone, cold and heavy. “When
will we do it?”

There was an uncomfortable  silence, as the Doorkeeper did not speak. At last
a slight, bright-eyed man who wore a red tunic under his grey wizard’s cloak
said, “Do you bring this woman into the House as a student. Master
Doorkeeper?”

“If I did, it would be up to you all to approve or disapprove,” said he.
“Do you?” asked the man in the red tunic, smiling a little.

“Master Hand,” said the Doorkeeper,  “she asked to enter as a student, and I
saw no reason to deny her.”

“Every reason,” said the Summoner.

A man with a deep, clear voice spoke:  ‘It’s not our judgment that prevails, but
the Rule of Roke, which we are sworn to follow.”


“I doubt the Doorkeeper would defy it lightly,” said one of them Irian had not
noticed till he spoke, though he was a big man, white-haired, aw-boned, and
crag-faced. Unlike the others, he looked at her as he spoke. “I am
Kurremkarmerruk,” he said to her. “As the Master Namer here, I make free
with names, my own included. Who named you, Irian?”

“The witch Rose of our village, lord,” she answered, standing straight, though
her voice came out high-pitched and rough.

“Is she misnamed?” the Doorkeeper asked the Namer.
Kurremkarmerruk shook his head. “No. But.    ”

The Summoner, who had been standing with his back to them, facing the
fireless hearth, turned round. “The names witches give each other are not our
concern here,” he said. “If  you have some interest in this woman, Doorkeeper,
it should be pursued outside these walls - outside the door you vowed to keep.
She has no place here nor ever will. She can bring only confusion, dissension,
and further weakness among us. I will speak no longer and say nothing else in
her presence. The only answer to conscious error is silence.”

“Silence is not enough, my lord,” said one who had not spoken before. To
Irian’s eyes he was very strange-looking, having pale reddish skin, long pale
hair, and narrow eyes the colour of ice. His speech was also strange, stiff and
somehow deformed. “Silence is the answer to everything, and to nothing,” he
said.

The Summoner lifted his noble, dark face and looked across the room at the
pale man, but did not speak. Without a word or gesture he turned away again
and left the room. As he walked slowly past Irian, she shrank back from him.
It was as if a grave had opened, a winter grave, cold, wet, dark. Her breath
stuck in her throat. She gasped a little for air. When she recovered herself  
she
saw the Changer and the pale man both watching her intently.

The one with a voice like a deep-toned bell looked at her too, and spoke to her
with a plain, kind severity. “As I see it, the man who brought you here meant
to do harm, but you do not. Yet being here, Irian, you do us and yourself

harm. Everything not in its own place does harm. A note sung, however well
sung, wrecks the tune it isn’t part of. Women teach women. Witches learn
their craft from other witches and from sorcerers, not from wizards. What we
teach here is in a language not for women’s tongues. The young heart rebels
against such laws, calling them unjust, arbitrary. But they are true laws,
founded not on what we want, but on what is. The just and the unjust, the
foolish and the wise, all must obey them, or waste life and come to grief.”

The Changer and a thin, keen-faced old man standing beside him nodded in


agreement. The Master Hand said, “Irian, I am sorry. Ivory was my pupil. If I
taught him badly, I did worse in sending him away. I thought him
insignificant, and so harmless. But he lied to you and beguiled you. You must
not feel shame. The fault was his, and mine.”

“I am not ashamed,” Irian said. She looked at them all. She felt that she
should thank them for their courtesy but the words would not come. She
nodded stiffly to them, turned round, and strode out of the room.

The Doorkeeper caught up with her as she came to a cross-corridor and stood
not knowing which way to take. “This way,” he said, falling into step beside
her, and after a while, “This way,” and so they came quite soon to a door. It
was not made of horn and ivory. It was uncarved oak, black and massive, with
an iron bolt worn thin with age. “This is the back door,” the mage said,
unbolting it. “Media’s Gate, they used to call it. I keep both doors.” He
opened         it. The brightness of the day dazzled Irian’s eyes. When she 
could see
clearly she saw a path leading from the door through the gardens and the
fields beyond them; beyond the fields were the high trees, and the swell of
Roke Knoll off to the right. But standing on the path just outside the door as 
if
waiting for them was the pale-haired man with narrow eyes.

“Patterner,” said the Doorkeeper, not at all surprised.

“Where do you send this lady?” said the Patterner in his strange speech.
“Nowhere,”  said the Doorkeeper. “I let her out as I let her in, at her desire.”
“Will  you come with me?” the Patterner said to Irian.

She looked at him and at the Doorkeeper and said nothing.

“I don’t live in this House. In any house,” the Patterner said. “I live there. 
The
Grove - ah,” he said, turning suddenly. The big, white-haired  man,
Kurremkarmerruk the Namer, was standing just down the path. He had not
been           standing there until the other mage said ‘Ah.” Irian stared from 
one to
the other in blank bewilderment.

This is only a seeming of me, a presentment, a sending,” the old man said to
her. “I don’t live here either. Miles off.” He gestured northward. “You might
come there when you’re done with the Patterner here. I’d like to learn more
about your name.” He nodded to the other two mages and was not there. A
bumblebee buzzed heavily through the air where he had been.

Irian looked down at the ground. After a long time she said, clearing her
throat, not looking up, “Is it true I do harm being here?”

“I don’t know,” said the Doorkeeper.

“In the Grove is no harm,” said the Patterner. “Come on. There is an old


house, a hut. Old, dirty. You don’t care, eh? Stay a while. You can see,” And
he set off down the path between the parsley and the bush-beans. She looked
at the Doorkeeper; he smiled a little. She followed the pale-haired man.

They walked a half-mile or so. The Knoll rose up full in the western sun on
their right. Behind them the School sprawled grey and many-roofed on its
lower hill. The grove of trees towered before them now. She saw oak and
willow, chestnut and ash, and tall evergreens. From the dense, sun-shot
darkness    of the trees a stream ran out, green-banked, with many brown
trodden places where cattle and sheep went down to drink or to cross over.
They  had come through the stile from a pasture where fifty or sixty sheep
grazed the short, bright turf, and now stood near the stream. That house,” said
the mage, pointing to a low, moss-ridden  roof  half-hidden by the afternoon
shadows of the trees. “Stay tonight. You will?”

He asked her to stay, he did not tell her to. All she could do was nod.
“I’ll bring food,” he said, and strode on, quickening his pace so that he

vanished soon, though not so abruptly as the Namer, in the light and shadow
under the trees. Irian watched till he was certainly gone and then made her
way through high grass and weeds to the little house.

It looked very old. It had been rebuilt and rebuilt again, but not for a long
time. Nor had anyone lived in it for a long time, from the feel of it. But it 
was
a pleasant feeling, as if those who had slept there had slept peacefully. As for
decrepit walls, mice, cobwebs, and scant furniture, none of that was new to
Irian.  She found a bald broom and swept out a bit. She unrolled her blanket on
the plank bed. She found a cracked pitcher in a skew-doored cabinet and

filled it with water from the stream that ran clear and quiet ten steps from the
door. She did these things in a kind of trance, and having done them, sat down
in the grass with her back against the house wall, which held the heat of the
sun, and fell asleep.

When she woke, the Master Patterner was sitting nearby, and a basket was on
the grass between them.

“Hungry? Eat,” he said.

“I’ll eat later, sir. Thank you,” said Irian.

“I am hungry now,” said the mage. He took a hardboiled egg from the basket,
cracked, shelled, and ate it.

They call this the Otter’s House,” he said. “Very old. As old as the Great
House. Everything is old, here. We are old - the Masters.”

“You’re not,” Irian said. She thought him between thirty and forty, though it


was hard to tell; she kept thinking his hair was white, because it was not
black.

“But I came far. Miles can be years. I am Kargish, from Karego. You know?”

“The Hoary Men!” said Irian, staring openly at him. All Daisy’s ballads of the
Hoary Men who sailed out of the east to lay the land waste and spit innocent
babes on their lances, and the story of how Erreth-Akbe lost the Ring of
Peace, and the new songs and the King’s Tale about how Archmage
Sparrowhawk had gone among the Hoary Men and come back with that ring -

“Hoary?” said the Patterner.

“Frosty. White,” she said, looking away, embarrassed.

“Ah.” Presently he said, “The Master Summoner is not old.” And she got a
sidelong look from those narrow, ice-coloured  eyes.

She said nothing.

“I think you feared him.”
She nodded.

When she said nothing, and some time had passed, he said, “In the shadow of
these trees is no harm. Only truth.”

“When he passed me,” she said in a low voice, “I saw a grave.”
“Ah,” said the Patterner.

He had made a little heap of bits of eggshell on the ground by his knee. He
arranged the white fragments into a curve, then closed it into a circle. “Yes,”
he  said, studying his eggshells, then, scratching up the earth a bit, he neatly
and delicately buried them. He dusted off his hands. Again his glance flicked
to Irian and away.

“You have been a witch, Irian?”
“No.”

“But you have some knowledge.”

“No. I don’t. Rose wouldn’t teach me. She said she didn’t dare. Because I had
power but she didn’t know what it was.”

“Your Rose is a wise flower,” said the mage, unsmiling.

“But I know I have -I have something to do, to be. That’s why I wanted to
come here. To find out. On the Isle of the Wise.”

She was getting used to his strange face now and was able to read it. She


thought that he looked sad. His way of speaking was harsh, quick, dry,
peaceable. The men of the Isle are not always wise, eh?” he said. “Maybe the
Doorkeeper.”  He looked at her now, not glancing but squarely, his eyes
catching        and holding hers. “But there. In the wood. Under the trees. 
There is
the   old wisdom. Never old. I can’t teach you. I can take you into the Grove.”
After a minute he stood up. “Yes?”

“Yes,” she said uncenainly.
“The house is all right?”
“Yes -”

“Tomorrow,”  he said, and strode off.

So for a half-month or more of the hot days of summer, Irian slept in the
Otter’s House, which was a peaceful one, and ate what the Master Patterner
brought her in his basket - eggs, cheese, greens, fruit, smoked mutton - and
went with him every afternoon into the grove of high trees, where the paths
seemed never to be quite where she remembered them, and often led on far
beyond what seemed the confines of the wood. They walked there in silence,
and spoke seldom when they rested. The mage was a quiet man. Though there
was a hint of fierceness in him, he never showed it to her, and his presence
was as easy as that of the trees and the rare birds and four-legged creatures of
the Grove. As he had said, he did not try to teach her. When she asked about
the Grove, he told her that, with Roke Knoll, it had stood since Segoy made
the islands of the world, and that all magic was in the roots of the trees, and
that they were mingled with the roots of all the forests that were or might yet
be. “And sometimes the Grove is in this place,” he said, “and sometimes in
another. But it is always.”

She had never seen where he lived. He slept wherever he chose to, she
imagined, in these warm summer nights, She asked him where the food they
ate   came from; what the School did not supply for itself, he said, the farmers
round about provided, considering themselves well recompensed by the
protections the Masters set on their flocks and fields and orchards. That made
sense    to her. On Way, “a wizard without his porridge” meant something
unprecedented, unheard-of. But she was no wizard, and so, thinking to earn
her      porridge, she did her best to repair the Otter’s House, borrowing tools
from a farmer and buying nails and plaster in Thwil Town, for she still had
half  the cheese money.

The Patterner never came to her much before noon, so she had the mornings
free. She was used to solitude, but still she missed Rose and Daisy and Coney,
and the chickens and the cows and ewes, and the rowdy, foolish dogs, and all
the work she did at home trying to keep Old Iria together and put food on the


table. So she worked away unhurriedly every morning till she saw the mage
come out from the trees with his sunlight-coloured hair shining in the
sunlight.

Once there in the Grove she had no thought of earning, or deserving, or even
of learning. To be there was enough, was all.

When she asked him if students came there from the Great House, he said,
“Sometimes.” Another time he said, “My words are nothing. Hear the leaves.”
That was all he said that could be called teaching. As she walked, she listened
to the leaves when the wind rustled them or stormed in the crowns of the
trees; she watched the shadows play, and thought about the roots of the trees
down in the darkness of the earth. She was utterly content to be there. Yet
always, without discontent or urgency, she felt that she was waiting. And that
silent expectancy was deepest and clearest when she came out of the shelter

of the woods and saw the open sky.

Once, when they had gone a long way and the trees, dark evergreens she did
not know, stood very high about them, she heard a call - a horn blowing, a
cry? - remote, on the very edge of hearing. She stood still, listening towards
the west. The mage walked on, turning only when he realized she had
stopped.

“I heard -” she said, and could not say what she had heard.

He listened. They walked on at last through a silence enlarged and deepened
by that far call.

She never went into the Grove without him, and it was many days before he
left her alone within it. But one hot afternoon when they came to a glade
among a stand of oaks, he said, “I will come back here, eh?” and walked off
with his quick, silent step, lost almost at once in the dappled, shifting depths
of the forest.

She had no wish to explore for herself. The peacefulness of the place called
for stillness, watching, listening; and she knew how tricky the paths were, and
that the Grove was, as the Patterner put it, “bigger inside than outside’. She
sat down in a patch of sun-dappled shade and watched the shadows of the
leaves play across the ground. The oakmast was deep; though she had never
seen wild swine in the wood, she saw their tracks here. For a moment she
caught the scent of a fox. Her thoughts moved as quietly and easily as the
breeze moved in the warm light.

Often her mind here seemed empty of thought, full of the forest itself, but this
day memories came to her, vivid. She thought about Ivory, thinking she

would never see him again, wondering if he had found a ship to take him back


to Havnor. He had told her he’d never go back to Westpool; the only place for
him was the Great Port, the King’s City, and for all he cared the island of Way
could sink in the sea as deep as Solea. But she thought with love of the roads
and fields of Way. She thought of Old Iria village, the marshy spring under
Iria Hill, the old house on it. She thought about Daisy singing ballads in the
kitchen, winter evenings, beating out the time with her wooden clogs; and old
Coney in the vineyards with his razor-edge knife, showing her how to prune
the vine “right down to the life in it”; and Rose, her Etaudis, whispering
charms to ease the pain in a child’s broken arm. I have known wise people,
she thought. Her mind flinched away from remembering  her father, but the
motion of the leaves and shadows drew it on. She saw him drunk, shouting.

She felt his prying, tremulous hands on her. She saw him weeping, sick,

shamed, and grief rose up through her body and dissolved, like an ache that
melts away in a long stretch. He was less to her than the mother she had not
known.

She stretched,  feeling the ease of her body in the warmth, and her mind
drifted back to Ivory. She had had no one in her life to desire. When the
young wizard first came riding by so slim and arrogant, she wished she could
want him; but she didn’t and couldn’t, and so she had thought him spell-
protected. Rose had explained to her how wizards’ spells worked  ‘so that it
never enters your head nor theirs, see, because it would take from their power,
they say’. But Ivory, poor Ivory, had been all too unprotected.  If anybody was
under a spell of chastity it must have been herself, for charming and
handsome    as he was she had never been able to feel a thing for him but 
liking,
and   her only lust was to learn what he could teach her.

She considered herself, sitting in the deep silence of the Grove. No bird sang;
the breeze was down; the leaves hung still. Am I ensorcelled? Am I a sterile
thing, not whole, not a woman? she asked herself, looking at her strong bare
arms, the slight, soft swell of her breasts in the shadow under the throat of 
her
shirt.

She looked up and saw the Hoary Man come out of a dark aisle of great oaks
and come towards her across the glade.

He stopped in front of her. She felt herself blush, her face and throat burning,
dizzy, her ears ringing. She sought words, anything to say, to turn his 
attention
away from her, and could find nothing at all. He sat down near her. She
looked down, as if studying the skeleton of a last-year’s leaf by her hand.

What do I want? she asked herself, and the answer came not in words but
throughout her whole body and soul: the fire, a greater fire than that, the
flight, the flight burning -


She came back into herself, into the still air under the trees. The Hoary Man
sat near her, his face bowed down, and she thought how slight and light he
looked, how quiet and sorrowful. There was nothing to fear. There was no
harm.

He looked over at her.

“Irian,” he said, “do you hear the leaves?”

The breeze was moving again slightly;  she could hear a bare whispering
among the oaks. “A little,” she said.

“Do you hear the words?”
“No.”

She asked nothing and he said no more. Presently he got up, and she followed
him to the path that always led them, sooner or later, out of the wood to the
clearing by the Thwilburn and the Otter’s House. When they came there, it
was    late afternoon. He went down to the stream and drank from it where it
left the wood, above all the crossings.  She did the same. Then sitting in the
cool, long grass of the bank, he began to speak.

“My people, the Kargs, they worship gods. Twin gods, brothers. And the king
there is also a god. But before that and after are the streams. Caves, stones,
hills. Trees. The earth. The darkness of the earth.”

The Old Powers,” Irian said.

He nodded. There, women know the Old Powers. Here too, witches. And the
knowledge is bad - eh?”

When he added that little questioning “eh?” or “neh?” to the end of what had
seemed a statement it always took her by surprise. She said nothing.

“Dark is bad,” said the Patterner. “Eh?”

Irian drew a deep breath and looked at him eye to eye as they sat there.
“”Only in dark the light,”” she said.

“Ah,” he said. He looked away so that she could not see his expression.

“I should go,” she said. “I can walk in the Grove, but not live there. It isn’t
my - my place. And the Master Chanter said I did harm by being here.”

“We all do harm by being,” said the Patterner.

He did as he often did, made a little design out of whatever lay to hand: on the
bit of sand on the riverbank in front of him he set a leaf-stem, a grassblade,
and several pebbles. He studied them and rearranged them. “Now I must
speak of harm,” he said.


After a long pause he went on. “You know that a dragon brought back our
Lord Sparrowhawk, with the young king, from the shores of death. Then the
dragon carried Sparrowhawk away to his home, for his power was gone, he
was not a mage. So presently the Masters of  Roke met to choose a new
Archmage, here, in the Grove, as always. But not as always.

“Before the dragon came, the Summoner too had returned from death, where
he can go, where his art can take him. He had seen our lord and the young
king there, in that country across the wall of stones. He said they would not
come back. He said Lord Sparrowhawk had told him to come back to us, to
life, to bear that word. So we grieved for our lord.

“But then came the dragon, Kalessin, bearing him living.

“The Summoner was among us when we stood on Roke Knoll and saw the
Archmage kneel to King Lebannen. Then, as the dragon bore our friend away,
the Summoner fell down.

“He lay as if dead, cold, his heart not beating, yet he breathed. The Herbal
used all his art, but could not rouse him. “He is dead,” he said. “The breath
will not leave him, but he is dead.” So we mourned him. Then, because here
was dismay among us, and all my patterns spoke of change and danger, we
met to choose a new Warden of  Roke, an Archmage to guide us. And in our
council we set the young king in the Summoner’s place. To us it seemed right
that he should sit among us. Only the Changer spoke against it at first, and
then agreed.

“But we met, we sat, and we could not choose. We said this and said that, but
no name was spoken. And then I...” He paused a while. There came on me
what my people call the eduevanu, the other breath. Words came to me and I
spoke them. I said, Hama Gondun! And Kurremkarmerruk told them this in
Hardic: “A woman on Gont.” But when I came back to my own wits, I could
not tell them what that meant. And so we parted with no Archmage chosen.

The king left soon after, and the Master Windkey went with him. Before the
king was to be crowned, they went to Gont and sought our lord, to find what
that meant, “a woman on Gont”. Eh? But they did not see him, only my
countrywoman  Tenar of the Ring. She said she was not the woman they
sought.            And they found no one, nothing. So Lebannen  judged it to be 
a
prophecy yet to be fulfilled. And in Havnor he set his crown on his own head.

The Herbal, and I too, judged the Summoner dead. We thought the breath he
breathed was left from some spell of his own art that we did not understand,
like the spell snakes know that keeps their heart beating long after they are
dead. Though it seemed terrible to bury a breathing body, yet he was cold, and
his blood did not run, and no soul was in him. That was more terrible. So we


made ready to bury him. And then, by his grave, his eyes opened. He moved,
and spoke. He said, “I have summoned myself  again into life, to do what must
be done.”’

The Patterner’s voice had grown rougher, and he suddenly brushed the little
design of pebbles apart with the palm of his hand.

“So when the Windkey returned, we were nine again. But divided. For the
Summoner said we must meet again and choose an Archmage. The king had
had no place among us, he said. And “a woman on Gont”, whoever she may
be, has no place among the men on Roke. Eh? The Windkey, the Chanter, the
Changer, the Hand, say he is right. And as King Lebannen is one returned
from death, fulfilling that prophecy, they say so will the Archmage be one
returned from death.”

“But -” Irian said, and stopped.

After a while the Patterner said, “That art, summoning,  you know, is very ...
terrible. It is ...  always danger. Here,” and he looked up into the green-gold
darkness of the trees, “here is no summoning. No bringing back across the
wall. No wall.”

His face was a warrior’s face, but when he looked into the trees it was
softened, yearning.

“So,” he said, “now he makes you his reason for our meeting. But I will not
go to the Great House. I will not be summoned.”

“He won’t come here?”

“I think he will not walk in the Grove. Nor on Roke Knoll. On the Knoll,
what is, is so,”

She did not know what he meant, but did not ask, preoccupied:  “You say he
makes me his reason for you to meet together.”

“Yes. To send away one woman, it takes nine mages.” He very seldom smiled,
and when he did it was quick and fierce. “We are to meet to uphold the Rule
of Roke. And so to choose an Archmage.”

“If I went away -” She saw him shake his head. “I could go to the Namer -”
“You are safer here.”

The idea of doing harm troubled her, but the idea of danger had not entered
her mind. She found it inconceivable. “I’ll be all right,” she said. “So the
Namer, and you - and the Doorkeeper?”

“- do not wish Thorion to be Archmage. Also the Master Herbal, though he
digs and says little.”


He saw Irian staring at him in amazement. Thorion the Summoner speaks his
true name,” he said. “He died, eh?”

She knew that King Lebannen used his true name openly. He too had returned
from death. Yet that the Summoner should do so continued to shock and
disturb her as she thought about it.

“And the ...  the students?”
“Divided also.”

She thought about the School, where she had been so briefly. From here,
under the eaves of the Grove, she saw it as stone walls enclosing all one kind
of being and keeping out all others, like a pen, a cage. How could any of them
keep their balance in a place like that?

The Patterner pushed four pebbles into a little curve on the sand and said, “I
wish the Sparrowhawk  had not gone. I wish I could read what the shadows
write. But all I can hear the leaves say is change, change... Everything will
change but them.” He looked up into the trees again with that yearning look.
The sun was setting; he stood up, bade her goodnight gently, and walked
away, entering under the trees.

She sat on a while by the Thwilburn. She was troubled by what he had told
her and by her thoughts and feelings in the Grove, and troubled that any
thought or feeling could have troubled her there. She went to the house, set
out    her supper of smoked meat and bread and summer lettuce, and ate it
without tasting it. She roamed restlessly back down he streambank to the
water.     It was very still and warm in the late dusk, only the largest stars
burning through a milky overcast. She slipped off  her sandals and put her feet
in   the water. It was cool, but veins of sunwarmth ran through it. She slid out
of her clothes, the man’s breeches and shirt that were all she had, and slipped
naked into the water, feeling the push and stir of the current all along her
body. She had never swum in the streams at Iria, and she had hated the sea,
heaving grey and cold, but this quick water pleased her, tonight. She drifted
and floated, her hands slipping over silken underwater rocks and her own
silken flanks, her legs sliding through waterweeds. All trouble and
restlessness washed away from her in the running of the water, and she
floated           in delight in the caress of the stream, gazing up at the 
white, soft fire
of   the stars.

A chill ran through her. The water ran cold. Gathering herself  together, her
limbs still soft and loose, she looked up and saw on the bank above her the
black figure of a man.

She stood straight up in the water.


“Get out!” she shouted. “Get away, you traitor, you foul lecher, or I’ll cut the
liver out of you!” She sprang up the bank, pulling herself  up by the tough
bunchgrass, and scrambled to her feet. No one was there. She stood afire,
shaking with rage. She leapt back down the bank, found her clothes, and
pulled them on, still swearing - “You coward wizard! You traitorous son of a
bitch!”

“Irian?”

“He was here!” she cried. “That foul heart, that Thorion!” She strode to meet
the Patterner as he came into the starlight by the house. “I was bathing in the
stream, and he stood there watching me!”

“A sending - only a seeming of him. It could not hurt you, Irian.”

“A sending with eyes, a seeming with seeing! May he be -” She stopped, at a
loss suddenly for the word. She felt sick. She shuddered, and swallowed the
cold spittle that welled in her mouth.

The Patterner came forward and took her hands in his. His hands were warm,
and she felt so mortally cold that she came close up against him for the
warmth of his body. They stood so for a while, her face turned from him but
their hands joined and their bodies pressed close. At last she broke free,
straightening herself, pushing back her lank wet hair. Thank you,” she said. “I
was   cold.”

“I know.”

“I’m never cold,” she said. “It was him.”

“I tell you, Irian, he cannot come here, he cannot harm you here.”

“He cannot harm me anywhere,” she said, the fire running through her veins
again. “If he tries to, I’ll destroy him.”

“Ah,” said the Patterner.

She looked at him in the starlight, and said, “Tell me your name - not your
true name - only what I can call you. When I think of you.”

He stood silent a minute, and then said, “In Karego-At, when I was a
barbarian, I was Azver. In Hardic, that is a banner of war.”

“Azver,” she said. “Thank you.”

She lay awake in the little house, feeling the air stifling and the ceiling
pressing down on her, then slept suddenly and deeply. She woke as suddenly
when the east was just getting light. She went to the door to see what she
loved best to see, the sky before sunrise. Looking down from it she saw Azver
the Patterner rolled up in his grey cloak, sound asleep on the ground before


her doorstep. She withdrew noiselessly into the house. In a little while she
saw him going back to his woods, walking a bit stiffly and scratching his head
as he went, as people do when half awake.

She got to work scraping down the inner wall of the house, readying it to
plaster. But before the sun was in the windows, there was a knock at her open
door. Outside was the man she had thought was a gardener, the Master

Herbal, looking solid and stolid, like a brown ox, beside the gaunt, grim-faced
old Namer.

She came to the door and muttered some kind of greeting. They daunted her,
these Masters of  Roke, and also their presence meant that the peaceful time
was over, the days of walking in the silent summer forest with the Patterner.
That had come to an end last night. She knew it, but she did not want to know
it.

“The Patterner sent for us,” said the Master Herbal. He looked uncomfonable.
Noticing a clump of weeds under the window, he said, “That’s velvet.

Somebody from Havnor planted it here. Didn’t know there was any on the
island.” He examined it attentively, and put some seedpods into his pouch.

Irian was studying the Namer covertly but equally attentively, trying to see if
she could tell if he was what he had called a sending or was there in flesh and
blood. Nothing about him appeared insubstantial, but she thought he was not
there, and when he stepped into the slanting sunlight and cast no shadow, she
knew it.

“Is it a long way from where you live, sir?” she asked.

He nodded. “Left myself halfway,” he said. He looked up; the Patterner was
coming towards them, wide awake now.

He greeted them and asked, “The Doorkeeper will come?”

“Said he thought he’d better keep the doors,” said the Herbal. He closed is
many-pocketed pouch carefully and looked around at the others. “But I don’t
know if he can keep a lid on the ant-hill.”

“What’s up?” said Kurremkarmerruk. “I’ve been reading about dragons. Not
paying attention. But all the boys I had studying at the Tower left.”

“Summoned,”  said the Herbal, drily.
“So?” said the Namer, more drily.

“I can tell you only how it seems to me,” the Herbal said, reluctant,
uncomfortable.

“Do that,” the old mage said.


The Herbal still hesitated. “This lady is not of our council,” he said at last.
“She is of  mine,” said Azver.

“She came to this place at this time,” the Namer said. “And to this place, at
this time, no one comes by chance. All any of  us knows is how it seems to us.
There are names behind names, my Lord Healer.”

The dark-eyed mage bowed his head at that, and said, “Very well,” evidently
with relief  at accepting their judgment over his own. “Thorion has been much
with the other Masters, and with the young men. Secret meetings, inner
circles. Rumors, whispers. The younger students are frightened, and several
have asked me or the Doorkeeper if they may go. And we’d let them go. But
there’s no ship in port, and none has come into Thwil Bay since the one that
brought you, lady, and sailed again next day for Wathort. The Windkey keeps
the Roke-wind against all. If the king himself  should come, he could not land
on Roke,”

“Until the wind changes, eh?” said the Patterner.

“Thorion says Lebannen is not truly king, since no Archmage crowned him,”

“Nonsense!  Not history!” said the old Namer. “The first Archmage came
centuries after the last king. Roke ruled in the kings’ stead.”

“Ah,” said the Patterner. “Hard for the housekeeper to give up the keys when
the owner comes home.”

“The Ring of Peace is healed,” said the Herbal, in his patient, troubled voice,
“the prophecy is fulfilled, the son of Morred is crowned, and yet we have no
peace. Where have we gone wrong? Why can we not find the balance?”

“What does Thorion intend?” asked the Namer.

“To bring Lebannen here,” said the Herbal. “The young men talk of “the true
crown”. A second coronation,  here. By the Archmage Thorion.”

“Avert!” Irian blurted out, making the sign to prevent word from becoming
deed. None of the men smiled, and the Herbal belatedly made the same
gesture.

“How does he hold them all?” the Namer said. “Herbal, you were here when
Sparrowhawk and Thorion were challenged by Irioth. His gift was as great as
Thorion’s, I think. He used it to use men, to control them wholly. Is that what
Thorion does?”

“I don’t know,” the Herbal said. “I can only tell you that when I’m with him,
when I’m in the Great House, I feel that nothing can be done but what has
been done. That nothing will change. Nothing will grow. That no matter what


cures I use, the sickness will end in death.” He looked around at them all like
a hurt ox. “And I think it is true. There is no way to regain the Equilibrium
but by holding still. We have gone too far. For the Archmage and Lebannen to
go bodily into death, and return - it was not right. They broke a law that must
not be broken. It was to restore the law that Thorion returned.”

“What, to send them back into death?” the Namer said, and the Patterner,
“Who is to say what is the law?”

“There is a wall,” the Herbal said.

“That wall is not as deep-rooted as my trees,” said the Patterner.

“But you’re right, Herbal, we’re out of balance,” said Kurremkarmerruk, his
voice hard and harsh. “When and where did we begin to go too far? What
have we forgotten, turned our back on, overlooked?”

Irian looked from one to the other.

“When the balance is wrong, holding still is not good. It must get more
wrong,” said the Patterner. “Until -” He made a quick gesture of reversal with
his open hands, down going up and up down.

“What’s more wrong than to summon oneself  back from death?” said the
Namer.

“Thorion was the best of us all - a brave heart, a noble mind.” The Herbal
spoke almost in anger. “Sparrowhawk loved him. So did we all.”

“Conscience caught him,” said the Namer. “Conscience told him he alone
could set things right. To do it, he denied his death. So he denies life.”

“And who shall stand against him?” said the Patterner. “I can only hide in my
woods.”

“And I in my tower,” said the Namer. “And you, Herbal, and the Doorkeeper,
are in the trap, in the Great House. The walls we built to keep all evil out. Or
in, as the case may be.”

“We are four against him,” said the Patterner.
They are five against us,” said the Herbal.

“Has it come to this,” the Namer said, “that we stand at the edge of the forest
Segoy planted and talk of how to destroy one another?”

“Yes,” said the Patterner. “What goes too long unchanged destroys itself. The
forest is for ever because it dies and dies and so lives. I will not let this 
dead
hand touch me. Or touch the king who brought us hope. A promise was made,
made through me, I spoke it - “A woman on Gont” -I will not see that word


forgotten.”

“Then should we go to Gont?” said the Herbal, caught in Azver’s passion.
“Sparrowhawk is there.”

Tenar of the Ring is there,” said Azver.
“Maybe our hope is there,” said the Namer.

They stood silent, uncertain, trying to cherish hope.

Irian stood silent too, but her hope sank down, replaced by a sense of shame
and utter insignificance. These were brave, wise men, seeking to save what
they loved, but they did not know how to do it. And she had no share in their
wisdom, no part in their decisions. She drew away from them, and they did
not notice. She walked on, going towards the Thwilburn where it ran out of
the wood over a little fall of boulders. The water was bright in the morning
sunlight and made a happy noise. She wanted to cry but she had never been
good  at crying. She stood and watched the water, and her shame turned
slowly into anger.

She came back towards the three men, and said, “Azver.”
He turned to her, startled, and came forward a little.

“Why did you break your Rule for me? Was it fair to me, who can never be
what you are?”

Azver frowned. “The Doorkeeper admitted you because you asked,” he said.
“I brought you to the Grove because the leaves of the trees spoke your name
to me before you ever came here. Irian, they said, Irian. Why you came I
don’t know, but not by chance. The Summoner too knows that.”

“Maybe I came to destroy him.”
He looked at her and said nothing.
“Maybe I came to destroy Roke.”
His pale eyes blazed then. Try!”

A long shudder went through her as she stood facing him. She felt herself
larger than he was, larger than she was, enormously larger. She could reach
out one finger and destroy him. He stood there in his small, brave, brief
humanity, his mortality, defenseless. She drew a long, long breath. She
stepped back from him.

The sense of huge strength was draining out of her. She turned her head a
little and looked down, surprised to see her own brown arm, her rolled-up
sleeve, the grass springing cool and green around her sandaled feet. She


looked back at the Patterner and he still seemed a fragile being. She pitied and
honoured him. She wanted to warn him of the peril he was in. But no words
came to her at all. She turned round and went back to the streambank by the
little falls. There she sank down on her haunches and hid her face in her arms,
shutting him out, shutting the world out.

The voices of the mages talking were like the voices of the stream running.
The stream said its words and they said theirs, but none of them were the right
words.

IV.             Irian

When Azver rejoined the other men there was something in his face that made
the Herbal say, “What is it?”

“I don’t know,” he said. “Maybe we should not leave Roke.”

“Probably we can’t,” said the Herbal. “If the Windkey locks the winds against
us ...”

“I’m going back to where I am,” Kurremkarmerruk said abruptly. “I don’t like
leaving myself  about like an old shoe. I’ll join you this evening.” And he was
gone.

“I’d like to walk under your trees a bit, Azver,” the Herbal said, with a long
sigh.

“Go on, Deyala. I’ll stay here.” The Herbal went off. Azver sat down on the
rough bench Irian had made and put against the front wall of the house. He
looked upstream at her, crouching motionless on the bank. Sheep in the field
between them and the Great House blatted softly. The morning sun was
getting hot.

His father had named him Banner of War. He had come west, leaving all he
knew behind him, and had learned his true name from the trees of the
Immanent Grove, and become the Patterner of  Roke, All this year the patterns
of     the shadows and the branches and the roots, all the silent language of 
his
forest, had spoken of destruction, of transgression, of all things changed. Now
it was upon them, he knew. It had come with her.

She was in his charge, in his care, he had known that when he saw her.
Though she came to destroy Roke, as she had said, he must serve her. He did
so willingly. She had walked with him in the forest, tall, awkward, fearless;
she had put aside the thorny arms of brambles with her big, careful hand. Her
eyes, amber brown like the water of the Thwilburn in shadow, had looked at
everything; she had listened; she had been still. He wanted to protect her and


knew he could not. He had given her a little warmth when she was cold. He
had nothing else to give her. Where she must go she would go. She did not
understand danger. She had no wisdom but her innocence,  no amour but her
anger. Who are you, Irian? he said to her, watching her crouched there like an
animal locked in its muteness.

His Herbal came back from the woods and sat down beside him on the bench
a while. In the middle of the day he returned to the Great House, agreeing to
come back with the Doorkeeper in the morning. They would ask all the other
Masters to meet with them in the Grove. “But he won’t come,” Deyala said,
and Azver nodded.

All day he stayed near the Otter’s House, keeping watch on Irian, making her
eat a little with him. She came to the house, but when they had eaten she went
back to her place on the streambank and sat there motionless. And he too felt
a lethargy in his own body and mind, a stupidity, which he fought against but
could not shake off. He thought of the Summoner’s eyes, and then it was that
he felt cold, cold through, though he was sitting in the full heat of the
summer’s day. We are ruled by the dead, he thought. The thought would not
leave  him.

He was grateful to see Kurremkarmerruk coming slowly down the bank of the
Thwilburn from the north. The old man waded through the stream barefoot,
holding his shoes in one hand and his tall staff in the other, snarling when he
missed his footing on the rocks. He sat down on the near bank to dry his feet
and put his shoes back on. “When I go back to the Tower,” he said, “I’ll ride.
Hire a carter, buy a mule. I’m old, Azver.”

“Come up to the house,” the Patterner said, and he set out water and food for
the Namer.

“Where’s the girl?”

“Asleep.” Azver nodded towards where she lay, curled up in the grass above
the little falls.

The heat of the day was beginning to lessen and the shadows of the Grove lay
across the grass, though the Otter’s House was still in sunlight.

Kurremkarmerruk sat on the bench with his back against the house wall, and
Azver on the doorstep.

“We’ve come to the end of it,” the old man said out of silence.
Azver nodded, in silence.

“What brought you here, Azver?” the Namer asked. “I’ve often thought of
asking you. A long, long way to come. And you have no wizards in the


Kargish lands, I think.”

“No. But we have the things wizardry is made of. Water, stones, trees, words

“But not the words of the Making.”
“No. Nor dragons,”

“Never?”

“Only in some very, very old tales. Before the gods were. Before men were.
Before men were men, they were dragons.”

“Now that is interesting,” said the old scholar, sitting up straighter. “I told 
you
I was reading about dragons. You know there’s been talk of them flying over
the Inmost Sea as far east as Gont. That was no doubt Kalessin taking Ged
home, multiplied by sailors making a good story better. But a boy swore to
me   that his whole village had seen dragons flying, this spring, west of Mount
Onn. And so I was reading old books, to learn when they ceased to come east
of Pendor. And in one I came on your story, or something like it. That men
and dragons were all one kind, but they quarrelled.  Some went west and some
east, and they became two kinds, and forgot they were ever one.”

“We went fanhest east,” Azver said. “But do you know what the leader of an
army is, in my tongue?”

“Edran,” said the Namer promptly, and laughed. “Drake. Dragon...”

After a while he said, “I could chase an etymology on the brink of doom ...
But I think, Azver, that that’s where we are. We won’t defeat him.”

“He has the advantage,” Azver said, very dry.

“He does. But, admitting it unlikely, admitting it impossible - if we did defeat
him - if he went back into death and left us here alive - what would we do?

What comes next?”

After a long time, Azver said, “I have no idea.”
“Your leaves and shadows tell you nothing?”

“Change, change,” said the Patterner. Transformation.”

He looked up suddenly. The sheep, who had been grouped near the stile, were
scurrying off, and someone was coming along the path from the Great House.

“A group of young men,” said the Herbal, breathless, as he came to them.
“Thorion’s army. Coming here. To take the girl. To send her away.” He stood
and  drew breath. “The Doorkeeper was speaking with them when I left. I
think -”


“Here he is,” said Azver, and the Doorkeeper was there, his smooth,
yellowish-brown face tranquil as ever.

“I told them,” he said, “that if they went out Medra’s Gate this day, they’d
never go back through it into a House they knew. Some of them were for
turning back, then. But the Windkey and the Chanter urged them on. They’ll
be along soon.”

They could hear men’s voices in the fields east of the Grove.

Azver went quickly to where Irian lay beside the stream, and the others
followed him. She roused up and got to her feet, looking dull and dazed. They
were standing around her, a kind of  guard, when the group of thirty or more
men came past the little house and approached them. They were mostly older
students; there were five or six wizard’s staffs among the crowd, and the
Master Windkey led them. His thin, keen old face looked strained and weary,
but  he greeted the four mages courteously by their titles.

They greeted him, and Azver took the word - “Come into the Grove, Master
Windkey,” he said, “and we will wait there for the others of the Nine.”

“First we must settle the matter that divides us,” said the Windkey.
That is a stony matter,” said the Namer.

“The woman with you defies the Rule of  Roke,” the Windkey said. “She must
leave. A boat is waiting at the dock to take her, and the wind, I can tell you,
will stand fair for Way.”

“I have no doubt of that, my lord,” said Azver, “but I doubt she will go-”

“My Lord Patterner, will you defy our Rule and our community, that has been
one so long, upholding order against the forces of ruin? Will it be you, of all
men, who breaks the pattern?”

“It is not glass, to break,” Azver said. “It is breath, it is fire.”
It cost him a great effort to speak.

“It does not know death,” he said, but he spoke in his own language, and they
did not understand  him. He drew closer to Irian. He felt the warmth of her
body. She stood staring, in that animal silence, as if she did not understand
any   of them.

“Lord Thorion has returned from death to save us all,” the Windkey said,
fiercely and clearly. “He will be Archmage. Under his rule Roke will be as it
was. The king will receive the true crown from his hand, and rule with his
guidance, as Morred ruled. No witches will defile sacred ground. No dragons
will threaten the Inmost Sea. There will be order, safety, and peace.”


None of the mages answered him. In the silence, the men with him
murmured, and a voice among them said, “Let us have the witch.”

“No,” Azver said, but could say nothing else. He held his staff  of willow, but
it was only wood in his hand.

Of the four of them, only the Doorkeeper  moved and spoke. He took a step
forward, looking from one young man to the next and the next. He said, “You
trusted me, giving me your names. Will you trust me now?”

“My lord,” said one of them with a fine, dark face and a wizard’s oaken staff,
“we do trust you, and therefore ask you to let the witch go, and peace return.”

Irian stepped forward before the Doorkeeper could answer.

“I am not a witch,” she said. Her voice sounded high, metallic, after the men’s
deep voices. “I have no art. No knowledge. I came to learn.”

“We do not teach women here,” said the Windkey. “You know that.”

“I know nothing,” Irian said. She stepped forward again, facing the mage
directly. Tell me who I am.”

“Learn your place, woman,” the mage said with cold passion.

“My place,” she said, slowly, the words dragging, “my place is on the hill.
Where things are what they are. Tell the dead man I will meet him there.”

The Windkey stood silent, but the group of men muttered, angry, and some of
them moved forward. Azver came between her and them, her words releasing
him from the paralysis of mind and body that had held him. “Tell Thorion we
will meet him on Roke Knoll,” he said. “When he comes, we will be there.

Now come with me,” he said to Irian.

The Namer, the Doorkeeper, and the Herbal followed him with her into the
Grove. There was a path for them. But when some of the young men started
after them, there was no path.

“Come back,” the Windkey said to the men.

They turned back, uncertain. The low sun was still bright on the fields and the
roofs of the Great House, but inside the wood it was all shadows.

“Witchery,”  they said, “sacrilege, defilement.”

“Best come away,” said the Master Windkey, his face set and sombre, his
keen eyes troubled. He set off back to the School, and they straggled after
him, arguing and debating in frustration and anger.

They were not far inside the Grove, and still beside the stream, when Irian
stopped, turned aside, and crouched down by the enormous, hunching roots of


a willow that leaned out over the water. The four mages stood on the path.

“She spoke with the other breath,” Azver said.
The Namer nodded.

“So we must follow her?” the Herbal asked.

This time the Doorkeeper nodded. He smiled faintly and said, “So it would
seem.”

“Very well,” said the Herbal, with his patient, troubled look; and he went
aside a little, and knelt to look at some small plant or fungus on the forest
floor.

Time passed as always in the Grove, not passing at all it seemed, yet gone, the
day gone quietly by in a few long breaths, a quivering of leaves, a bird
singing far off and another answering it from even fanher. Irian stood up
slowly.    She did not speak, but looked down the path, and then walked down
it.     The four men followed her.

They came out into the calm, open evening air. The west still held some
brightness as they crossed the Thwilburn and walked across the fields to Roke
Knoll, which stood up before them in a high dark curve against the sky.

They’re coming,” the Doorkeeper said. Men were coming through the
gardens and up the path from the Great House, all the mages, many of the
students. Leading them was Thorion the Summoner, tall in his grey cloak,
carrying his tall staff of bone-white wood, about which a faint gleam of
werelight hovered.

Where the two paths met and joined to wind up to the heights of the Knoll,
Thorion stopped and stood waiting for them. Irian strode forward to face him.

“Irian of Way,” the Summoner said in his deep, clear voice, “that there may
be peace and order, and for the sake of the balance of all things, I bid you now
leave this island. We cannot give you what you ask, and for that we ask your
forgiveness. But if you seek to stay here you forfeit forgiveness, and must
learn        what follows on transgression.”

She stood up, almost as tall as he, and as straight.  She said nothing for a
minute and then spoke out in a high, harsh voice. “Come up on to the hill,
Thorion,” she said.

She left him standing at the waymeet, on the level ground, and walked up the
hill path for a little way, a few strides. She turned and looked back down at
him. “What keeps you from the hill?” she said.

The air was darkening around them. The west was only a dull red line, the


eastern sky was shadowy above the sea.

The Summoner looked up at Irian. Slowly he raised his arms and the white
staff  in the invocation  of a spell, speaking in the tongue that all the 
wizards
and mages of Roke had learned, the language of their an, the Language of the
Making: ‘Irian, by your name I summon you and bind you to obey me!”

She hesitated, seeming for a moment to yield, to come to him, and then cried
out, “I am not only Irian!”

At that the Summoner ran up towards her, reaching out, lunging at her as if to
seize and hold her. They were both on the hill now. She towered above him
impossibly, fire breaking forth between them, a flare of red flame in the dusk
air, a gleam of red-gold scales, of vast wings - then that was gone, and there
was nothing there but the woman standing on the hill path and the tall man
bowing down before her, bowing slowly down to eanh, and lying on it.

Of them all it was the Herbal, the healer, who was the first to move. He went
up the path and knelt down by Thorion. “My lord,” he said, “my friend.”

Under the huddle of the grey cloak his hands found only a huddle of clothes
and dry bones and a broken staff.

“This is better, Thorion,” he said, but he was weeping.

The old Namer came forward and said to the woman on the hill, “Who are
you?”

“I do not know my other name,” she said. She spoke as he had spoken, as she
had spoken to the Summoner, in the Language of the Making, the tongue the
dragons speak.

She turned away and began to walk on up the hill.

“Irian,” said Azver the Patterner, “will you come back to us?”

She halted and let him come up to her. “I will, if you call me,” she said.
She reached out and touched his hand. He drew his breath sharply.
“Where will you go?” he said.

“To those who will give me my name. In fire not water. My people.”
“In the west,” he said.

She said, “Beyond the west.”

She turned away from him and them and went on up the hill in the gathering
darkness. As she went farther from them they saw her then, all of them, the
great gold-mailed flanks, the spiked, coiling tail, the talons, and the breath


that was bright fire. On the crest of the Knoll she paused a while, her long
head turning to look slowly round the Isle of  Roke, gazing longest at the
Grove, only a blur of darkness in darkness now. Then with a rattle like the
shaking of sheets of brass the wide, vaned wings opened and the dragon
sprang up into the air, circled Roke Knoll once, and flew.

A curl of fire, a wisp of smoke drifted down through the dark air.

Azver the Patterner stood with his left hand holding his right hand, which her
touch had burnt. He looked down at the men who stood silent at the foot of
the hill, staring after the dragon. “Well, my friends,” he said, “what now?”

Only the Doorkeeper answered. He said, “I think we should go to our House,
and open its doors.”

A Description  of Earthsea

PEOPLES AND LANGUAGES
PEOPLE

THE HARDIC LANDS

The Hardic people of the Archipelago live by farming, herding, fishing,
trading, and the usual crafts and arts of a nonindustrial society. Their
population is stable and has never overcrowded the limited habitable land
available to them. Famine is unknown and poverty seldom acute.

Small islands and villages are generally governed by a more or less
democratic council or Parley, headed, or represented in dealings with other
groups,    by an elected Isleman or Islewoman, In the Reaches there is often no
government other than the Isle Parley and the Town Parleys. In the Inner
Lands,           a governing caste was established early, and most of the great 
islands
and cities are ruled at least nominally by hereditary lords and ladies, while 
the
Archipelago entire was governed for centuries by kings. Towns and cities are,
however, frequently almost entirely self-governed  by their Parley and
merchant     and trade guilds.

The great guilds, since their network covers all the Inner Lands, answer to no
overlord or authority except the King in Havnor.

Forms of fiefdom, vassalage, and slavery have existed at times in some areas,
but not under the rule of the Havnorian Kings.

The existence of magic as a recognized, effective power wielded by certain
individuals, but not by all, shapes and influences all the institutions  of the


Hardic peoples, so that, much as ordinary life in the Archipelago seems to
resemble that of nonindustrial peoples elsewhere, there are almost
immeasurable  differences. One of these differences may be, or may be
indicated by, the lack of any kind of institutionalised religion. Superstition 
is
as common as it is anywhere, but there are no gods, no cults, no formal
worship of any kind. Ritual occurs only in traditional offerings at the sites of
the Old Powers, in the great, universally celebrated annual festivals such as
Sunreturn and the Long Dance, in the speaking and singing of the traditional
songs and epics at these festivals, and, perhaps, in the performance of spells
of magic.

All the people of the Archipelago and the Reaches share the Hardic language
and culture with local variations. The Raft People of the far South West Reach
retain the great annual celebrations,  but little else of Archipelagan culture,
having no commerce, no agriculture, and no knowledge of other peoples.

Most people of the Archipelago have brown or red-brown skin, black straight
hair, and dark eyes; the predominant body type is short, slender, small-boned,
but fairly muscular and well-fleshed.  In the East and South Reaches people
tend to be taller, heavier boned, and darker. Many Southerners have very dark
brown skin. Most Archipelagan men have little or no facial hair.

The people of Osskil, Rogma, and Borth are lighter-skinned than others in the
Archipelago, and often have brown or even blond hair and light eyes; the men
are often bearded. Their language and some of their beliefs are closer to
Kargish than to Hardic. These far Northerners probably descend from Kargs
who, after settling the four great Eastern lands, sailed back to the West about
two thousand years ago.

THE KARGAD LANDS

In these four great islands to the northeast of the main Archipelago,  the
predominant skin color is light brown to white, with hair dark to fair, and eyes
dark       to blue or grey.

Not much mixing of the Kargish and Archipelagan skin-color types has taken
place except on Osskil, since the North Reach is isolated and thinly
populated, and the Kargad people have held themselves apart from and often
in  enmity towards the Archipelagans for two or three millennia.

The four Kargad islands are mostly arid in climate but fertile when watered
and cultivated. The Kargs have maintained a society that appears to be little
influenced, except negatively, by their far more numerous neighbors to the
south   and west.

Among the Kargs the power of magic appears to be very rare as a native gift,


perhaps because it was neglected or actively suppressed by their society and
government. Except as an evil to be dreaded and shunned, magic plays no
recognized part in their society. This inability or refusal to practice magic 
puts
the Kargs at a disadvantage with the Archipelagans in almost every respect,
which may explain why they have generally held themselves aloof from trade
or any kind of interchange,  other than piratical raids and invasions of the
nearer islands of the South Reach and around the Gontish Sea.

DRAGONS

Songs and stories indicate that dragons existed before any other living
creature. The Old Hardic kennings or euphemisms for the word dragon are
Firstborn, Eldest, Elder Children. (The words for the firstborn child of a
family       in Osskilian, akhad, and in Kargish, gadda, are derived from the 
word
haath, “dragon,” in the Old Speech.)

Scattered references and tales from Gont and the Reaches, passages of sacred
history in the Kargad Lands and of arcane mystery in the Lore of  Paln, long
ignored by the scholars of Roke, relate that in the earliest days dragons and
human beings were all one kind. Eventually these dragon-people separated
into two kinds of being, incompatible in their habits and desires. Perhaps a
long geographical separation caused a gradual natural divergence, a
differentiation of species. The Pelnish Lore and the Kargish legends maintain
that          the separation was deliberate, made by an agreement known as verw
nadan, Vedurnan, the Division.

These legends are best preserved in Hur-at-Hur, the easternmost of the Kargad
Lands, where dragons have degenerated into animals without high
intelligence.   Yet it is in Hur-at-Hur that people keep the most vivid 
conviction
of        the original kinship of human and dragon kind. And with these tales of
ancient times come stories of recent days about dragons who take human
form, humans who take dragon form, beings who are in fact both human and
dragon.

However the Division came about, from the beginning of historical time
human beings have lived in the main Archipelago and the Kargad Lands east
of   it, while the dragons kept to the westernmost isles-and beyond. People
have puzzled at their choosing the empty sea for their domain, since dragons
are “creatures of wind and fire,” who drown if plunged under the sea. But
they have no need to touch down either on water or on earth; they live on the
wing, aloft in air, sunlight, starlight. The only use a dragon has for the 
ground
is some kind of rocky place where it can lay its eggs and rear the drakelets.

The small, barren islets of the farthest West Reach suffice for this.

The Creation of Ea contains no clear references to an original unity and


eventual separation of dragons and humans, but this may be because the poem
in its presumed original form, in the Language of the Making, dated back to a
time before the separation. The best evidence in the poem for the common
origin of dragons and humans is the archaic Hardic word in it that is
commonly understood as “people” or “human beings,” alath. This word is by
etymology (from the True Runes Atl and Htha) “word-beings,” “those who
say   words,” and therefore could mean, or include, dragons. Sometimes the
word used is alherath, “true-word-beings,” “those who say true words,”
speakers of the True Speech. This could mean human wizards, or dragons, or
both.  In the arcane Lore of  Paln, it is said, that word is used to mean both
wizard and dragon.

Dragons are born knowing the True Speech, or, as Ged put it, “the dragon and
the speech of the dragon are one.” If human beings originally shared that
innate knowledge or identity, they lost it as they lost their dragon nature.

LANGUAGES

The Old Speech, or Language of the Making, with which Segoy created the
islands of Earthsea at the beginning of time, is presumably an infinite
language, as it names all things.

This language is innate to dragons, not to humans, as said above. There are
exceptions. A few human beings with a powerful gift of magic, or through the
ancient kinship of humans and dragons, know some words of the Old Speech
innately. But the very great majority of  people must learn the Old Speech.

Hardic practitioners of the art magic learn it from their teachers. Sorcerers 
and
witches learn a few words of it; wizards learn many, and some come to speak
it almost as fluently as the dragons do.

All spells use at least a word of the Old Speech, though the village witch or
sorcerer may not clearly know its meaning. Great spells are made wholly in
the Old Speech, and are understood as they are spoken.

The Hardic language of the Archipelago,  the Osskili tongue of  Osskil, and the
Kargish tongue, are all remote descendants of the Old Speech. None of these
languages serves for the making of spells of magic.

The people of the Archipelago speak Hardic. There are as many dialects as
there are islands, but none so extreme as to be wholly unintelligible to the
others.

Osskili, spoken in Osskil and two islands northwest of it, has more affinities
to Kargish than to Hardic. Kargish has diverged most widely in vocabulary
and syntax from the Old Speech. Most of its speakers (like most Hardic
speakers) do not realise that their languages have a common ancestry.


Archipelagan scholars are aware of it, but most Kargs would deny it, since
they have confused Hardic with the Old Speech, in which spells are cast, and
thus fear and despise all Archipelagan speech as malevolent sorcery.

WRITING

Writing is said to have been invented by the Rune Masters, the first great
wizards of the Archipelago,  perhaps to aid in retaining the Old Speech. The
dragons have no writing.

There are two entirely different kinds of writing in Earthsea: the True Runes
and runic writing.

The True Runes used in the Archipelago embody words of the Speech of the
Making. True Runes are not symbols only, but reifactors: they can be used to
bring a thing or condition into being or bring about an event. To write such a
rune is to act. The power of the action varies with the circumstances. Most of
the True Runes are found only in ancient texts and lore-books,  and used only
by wizards trained in their use; but a good many of them, such as the symbol
written on the door lintel to protect a house from fire, are in common use,
familiar to unlearned people.

Long after the invention of the True Runes, a related but nonmagical runic
writing was developed for the Hardic language. This writing does not affect
reality any more than any writing does; that is to say, indirectly, but
considerably.

It is said that Segoy first wrote the True Runes in fire on the wind, so that 
they
are coeval with the Language of the Making. But this may not be so, since the
dragons do not use them, and if they recognise them, do not admit it.

Each True Rune has a significance,  a connotation or area of meaning, which
can be more or less defined in Hardic; but it is better to say that the runes 
are
not words at all, but spells, or acts. Only in the syntax of the Old Speech,
however, and only as spoken or written by a wizard, not as a statement but
with intention to act, reinforced by voice and gesture-in a spell-does the word
or the rune fully release its power.

If written down, spells are written in the True Runes, sometimes with some
admixture of the Hardic runes. To write in the True Runes, as to speak the Old
Speech, is to guarantee the truth of what one says-if  one is human. Human
beings cannot lie in that language. Dragons can; or so the dragons say; and if
they are lying, does that not prove that what they say is true?

The spoken name of a True Rune may be the word it signifies in the Old
Speech, or it may be one of the connotations of the rune translated into
Hardic.    The names of  commonly used runes such as Pirr (used to protect from


fire, wind, and madness), Sifl (“speed well”), Simn (“work well”) are used
without ceremony by ordinary people speaking Hardic; but practitioners of
magic speak even such well-known,  often used names with caution, since
they are in fact words in the Old Speech, and may influence events in
unintended or unexpected ways.

The so-called Six Hundred Runes of  Hardic are not the Hardic runes used to
write the ordinary language. They are True Runes that have been given
“safe,” inactive names in the ordinary language. Their true names in the Old
Speech must be memorised in silence. The ambitious student of wizardry will

go on to learn the “Further Runes,” the “Runes of Ea,” and many others. If the
Old Speech is endless, so are the runes.

Ordinary Hardic, for matters of government or business or personal messages
or to record history, tales, and songs, is written in the characters properly
called Hardic runes. Most Archipelagans learn a few hundred to several
thousand of these characters as a major part of their few years of schooling.

Spoken or written, Hardic is useless for casting spells.

LITERATURE  AND THE

SOURCES  OF  HISTORY

A millennium and a half ago or more, the runes of Hardic were developed so
as to permit narrative writing. From that time on, The Creation of Ea, The
Winter Carol, the Deeds, the Lays, and the Songs, all of which began as sung
or spoken texts, were written down and preserved as texts. They continue to
exist in both forms. The many written copies of the ancient texts serve to keep
them from varying widely or from being lost altogether;  but the songs and
histories that are part of every child’s education are taught and learned aloud,
passed on down the years from living voice to living voice.

Old Hardic differs in vocabulary and pronunciation from the current speech,
but the rote learning and regular speaking and hearing of the classics keeps
the archaic language meaningful (and probably puts some brake on linguistic
drift in daily speech), while the Hardic runes, like Chinese characters, can
accommodate widely varying pronunciations and shifts of meaning.

Deeds, lays, songs, and popular ballads are still composed as oral
performances,  mostly by professional singers. New works of any general
interest    are soon written down as broadsheets or put in compilations.

Whether performed or read silently, all such poems and songs are consciously
valued for their content, not for their literary qualities, which range from 
high
to nil. Loose regular meter, alliteration, stylised phrasing, and structuring by
repetition are the principal poetic devices. Content includes mythic,  epic, 
and


historical narrative, geographical descriptions, practical observations
concerning  nature, agriculture, sea lore, and crafts, cautionary tales and
parables, philosophical, visionary, and spiritual poetry, and love songs. The
deeds  and lays are usually chanted, the ballads sung, often with a percussion
accompaniment; professional chanters and singers may sing with the harp, the
viol,      drums, and other instruments. The songs generally have less narrative
content, and many are valued and preserved mostly for the tune.

Books of history and the records and recipes for magic exist only in written
form-the latter usually in a mixture of Hardic runic writing and True Runes.
Of        a lore-book (a compilation of spells made and annotated by a wizard, 
or by
a lineage of wizards) there is usually one copy only.

It is often a matter of  considerable importance that the words of these lore-
books not be spoken aloud.

The Osskili use the Hardic runes to write their language, since they trade
mostly with Hardic-speaking lands.

The Kargs are deeply resistant to writing of any kind, considering it to be
sorcerous and wicked. They keep complex accounts and records in weavings
of different colors and weights of yarn, and are expen mathematicians, using
base twelve; but only since the Godkings came to power have they employed
any kind of symbolic writing, and that sparingly. Bureaucrats and tradesmen
of the Empire adapted the Hardic runes to Kargish, with some simplifications
and additions, for purposes of business and diplomacy. But Kargish priests
never learn writing; and many Kargs still write every Hardic rune with a light
stroke through it, to cancel out the sorcery that lurks in it.

History

Note on dates: Many islands have their own local count of years. The most
widely used dating system in the Archipelago, which stems from the
Havnorian Tale, makes the year Morred took the throne the first year of
history. By this system, “present time” in the account you are reading is the
Archipelagan year 1058.

THE BEGINNINGS

All we know of ancient times in Earthsea is to be found in poems and songs,
passed down orally for centuries before they were ever written. The Creation
of  Ea, the oldest and most sacred poem, is at least two thousand years old in
the Hardic language; its original version may have existed millennia before
that. Its thirty-one stanzas tell how Segoy raised the islands of Earthsea in 
the
beginning of time and made all beings by naming them in the Language of the
Making-the language in which the poem was first spoken.


The ocean, however, is older than the islands; so say the songs.

Before bright Ea was, before Segoy
bade the islands be,

the wind of dawn blew on the sea...

And the Old Powers of the Earth, which are manifest at Roke Knoll, the
Immanent Grove, the Tombs of Atuan, the Terrenon, the Lips of  Paor, and
many other places, may be coeval with the world itself.

It may be that Segoy is or was one of the Old Powers of the Earth. It may be
that Segoy is a name for the Earth itself. Some think all dragons, or certain
dragons, or cenain people, are manifestations of Segoy. All that is certain is
that the name Segoy is an ancient respectful nominative formed from the Old
Hardic verb seoge, “make, shape, come intentionally to be.” From the same
root comes the noun esege, “creative force, breath, poetry.”

The Creation of Ea is the foundation of education in the Archipelago, By the
age of six or seven, all children have heard the poem and most have begun to
memorise it. An adult who doesn’t know it by heart, so as to be able to speak
or      sing it with others and teach it to children, is considered grossly 
ignorant. It
is taught in winter and spring, and spoken and sung entire every year at the
Long Dance, the celebration of the solstice of summer.

A quotation from it stands at the head of A Wizard of Earthsea:
Only in silence the word,

only in dark the light,
only in dying life:

bright the hawk’s flight
on the empty sky.

The beginning of the first stanza is quoted in Tehanu:
The making from the unmaking,

the ending from the beginning,
who shall know surely?

What we know is the doorway between them
that we enter departing.


Among all beings ever returning,
the eldest, the Doorkeeper, Segoy...

and the last line of the first stanza:

Then from the foam bright Ea broke.
HISTORY OF THE ARCHIPELAGO
THE KINGS OF ENLAD

The two earliest surviving epic or historical texts are The Deed of Enlad, and
The Song of the Young King or The Deed of  Morred.

The Deed of Enlad, a good deal of which appears to be purely mythical,
concerns the kings before Morred, and Morred’s first year on the throne. The
capital city of these rulers was Berila, on the island of Enlad.

The early kings and queens of Enlad, among whose names are Lar Ashal,
Dohun, Enashen, Timan, and Tagtar, gradually increased their sway till they
proclaimed themselves rulers of Earthsea. Their reign extended no farther
south      than Ilien and did not include Felkway in the east, Paln and Semel in
the west, or Osskil in the north, but they did send explorers out all over the
Inmost Sea and into the Reaches. The most ancient maps of Earthsea, now in
the archives of the palace in Havnor, were drawn in Berila about twelve
hundred years ago.

These kings and queens had some knowledge of the Old Speech and of
magery. Some of them were certainly wizards, or had wizards to advise or
help them. But magic in The Deed of Enlad is an erratic force, not to be relied
on. Morred was the first man, and the first king, to be called Mage.

MORRED

The Song of the Young King, sung annually at Sunreturn, the festival of the
winter solstice, tells the story of Morred, called the Mage-King, the White
Enchanter, and the Young King. Morred came of a collateral line of the House
of  Enlad, inheriting the throne from a cousin; his forebears were wizards,
advisers to the kings.

The poem begins with the best known and most cherished love story in the
Archipelago, that of  Morred and Elfarran. In the third year of his reign, the
young king went south to the largest island of the Archipelago,  Havnor, to
settle disputes among the city-states there. Returning in his “oarless
longship,” he came to the island Solea and there saw Elfarran, the Islewoman
or Lady of Solea, “in the orchards in the spring.” He did not continue on to


Enlad, but stayed with Elfarran. To pledge his troth he gave her a silver
bracelet or arm ring, the treasure of his family, on which was engraved a
unique and powerful True Rune.

Morred and Elfarran married, and the poem describes their reign as a brief
golden age, the foundation and touchstone of ethic and governance thereafter.

Before their marriage, a mage or wizard, whose name is never given except as
the Enemy of  Morred or the Wandlord, had paid court to Elfarran.

Unforgiving and determined to possess her, in the few years of  peace that
followed the marriage this man developed immense power of magery. After
five years he came forth and announced, in the words of the poem,

If Elfarran be not my own, I will unsay Segoy’s word,

I will unmake the islands, the white waves will whelm all.

He had power to raise huge waves on the sea, and to stop the tide or bring it
early; and his voice could enchant whole populations, bringing all who heard
him under his control. So he turned Morred’s people against him. Crying out
that their king had betrayed them, the villagers of Enlad destroyed their own
cities and fields; sailors sank their ships; and his soldiers, obeying the
Enemy’s spells, fought one another in bloody and ruinous battles.

While Morred sought to free his people from these spells and to confront his
enemy, Elfarran returned with their year-old child to her native island, Solea,
where her own powers would he strongest. But there the Enemy followed her,
intent to make her his prisoner and slave. She took refuge at the Springs of
Ensa, where, with her knowledge of the Old Powers of the place, she could
withstand the Enemy and force him off the island. “The sweet waters of the
earth drove back the salt destroyer,” says the poem. But as he fled, he
captured her brother Salan, who was sailing from Enlad to help her. Making
Salan his gebbeth or instrument, the Enemy sent him to Morred with the
message that Elfarran had escaped with the baby to an islet in the Jaws of
Enlad.

Trusting the messenger, Morred entered the trap. He barely escaped with his
life. The Enemy pursued him from the east to the west of Enlad in a trail of
ruin. On the Plains of Enlad, meeting the companions who had stayed loyal to
him, most of them sailors who had brought their ships to Enlad to aid him,
Morred turned and gave battle. The Enemy would not confront him directly,
but  sent Morred’s own spell-bound warriors to fight him, and worse, sent
sorceries that shriveled up the bodies of his men till they “living, seemed the
black thirst-dead of the desert.” To spare his people, Morred withdrew.


As he left the battlefield it began to rain, and he saw his enemy’s true name
written in raindrops in the dust.

Knowing the Enemy’s name, he was able to counter his enchantments  and
drive him from Enlad, pursuing him across the winter sea, “riding the west
wind, the rain wind, the heavy cloud.” Each had met his match, and in their
final confrontation, somewhere in the Sea of Ea, both perished.

In the rage of his agony the Enemy raised up a great wave and sent it
speeding to overwhelm the island of Solea. Elfarran knew this, as she knew
the moment of Morred’s death. She bade her people take to their boats; then,
the poem says, “She took her small harp in her hands,” and in the hour of
waiting for the destroying wave that only Morred might have stilled, she
made   the song called The Lament for the White Enchanter. The island was
drowned beneath the sea, and Elfarran with it. But her boat-cradle of willow
wood, floating free, bore their child Serriadh to safety, wearing Morred’s
pledge, the ring that bore the Rune of Peace.

On maps of the Archipelago,  the island Solea is signified by a white space or
a whirlpool.

After Morred, seven more kings and queens ruled from Enlad, and the realm
increased steadily in size and prosperity.

THE KINGS OF HAVNOR

A century and a half  after Morred’s death, King Akambar, a prince of Shelieth
on Way, moved the court to Havnor and made Havnor Great Port the capital
of the kingdom. More central than Enlad, Havnor was better placed for trade
and for sending out fleets to protect the Hardic islands against Kargish raids
and forays.

The history of the Fourteen Kings of  Havnor (actually six kings and eight
queens,   150-400) is told in the Havnorian Lay. Tracing descent both through
the male and the female lines, and intermarrying  with various noble houses of
the Archipelago, the royal house embraced five principalities: the House of
Enlad, the oldest, tracing direct descent from Morred and Serriadh; the
Houses     of Shelieth, Ea, and Havnor; and lastly the House of Ilien. Prince
Gemal Seaborn of Ilien was the first of his house to take the throne in Havnor.
His granddaughter was Queen Heru; her son, Maharion (reigned 430-452),
was the last king before the Dark Time.

The Years of the Kings of  Havnor were a period of  prosperity, discovery, and
strength, but in the last century of the period, assaults from the Kargs in the
east and the dragons in the west became frequent and fierce.

Kings, lords, and Islemen charged with defending the islands of the


Archipelago  came to rely increasingly  on wizards to fend off dragons and
Kargish fleets. In the Havnorian Lay and The Deed of the Dragonlords, as the
tale goes on, the names and exploits of these wizards begin to eclipse those of
the kings.

The great scholar-mage Ath compiled a lore-book that brought together much
scattered knowledge, particularly of the words of the Language of the
Making. His Book of  Names became the foundation of naming as a
systematic part of the an magic. Ath left his book with a fellow mage on Pody
when he went into the west, sent by the king to defeat or drive back a brood

of dragons who had been stampeding cattle, setting fires, and destroying
farms all through the western isles. Somewhere west of Ensmer, Ath
confronted the great dragon Orm. Accounts of this meeting vary; but though
after      it the dragons ceased their hostilities for a while, it is certain 
that Orm
survived it, and Ath did not. His book, lost for centuries, is now in the 
Isolate
Tower on Roke.

The food of dragons is said to be light, or fire; they kill in rage, to defend 
their
young, or for spon, but never eat their kill. Since time immemorial,  until the
reign of Heru, they had used only the outmost isles of the West Reach-which
may have been the easternmost borders of their own realm-for meeting and
breeding, and had seldom even been seen by most of the islanders. Naturally
irritable and arrogant, the dragons may have felt threatened by the increasing
population and prosperity of the Inner Lands, which brought constant boat
traffic even out in the West Reach. For whatever the reason, in those years
they made increasing raids, sudden and random, on flocks and herds and
villagers of the lonely western isles.

A tale of the Vedurnan or Division, known in Hur-at-Hur, says:
Men chose the yoke,

dragons the wing.
Men to own,
dragons no thing.

That is, human beings chose to have possessions and dragons chose not to.
But, as there are ascetics among humans, some dragons are greedy for shining
things, gold, jewels; one was Yevaud, who sometimes came among people in
human form, and who made the rich Isle of  Pendor into a dragon nursery,
until driven back into the west by Ged. But the marauding dragons of the Lay
and the songs seem to have been moved not so much by greed as by anger, a
sense of having been cheated, betrayed.


The deeds and lays that tell of raids by dragons and counterforays  by wizards
portray the dragons as pitiless as any wild animal, terrifying, unpredictable,
yet intelligent, sometimes wiser than the wizards. Though they speak the True
Speech, they are endlessly devious. Some of them clearly enjoy battles of wits
with wizards, “splitting arguments with a forked tongue.” Like human beings,
all but the greatest of them conceal their true names. In the lay Hasa’s Voyage,
the dragons appear as formidable but feeling beings, whose anger at the
invading human fleet is justified by their love of their own desolate domain.

They address the hero:

Sail home to the houses of the sunrise, Hasa.
Leave to our wings the long winds of the west,
leave us the air-sea, the unknown, the utmost...

MAHARION AND ERRETH-AKBE

Queen Heru, called the Eagle, inherited the throne from her father,
Denggemal of the House of Ilien. Her consort Aiman was of the House of
Morred. When she had ruled thirty years she gave the crown to their son
Maharion.

Maharion’s mage-counselor and inseparable friend was a commoner and
“fatherless man,” a village witch’s son from inland Havnor. The most beloved
hero     of the Archipelago, his story is told in The Deed of Erreth-Akbe, which
bards sing at the Long Dance of midsummer.

Erreth-Akbe’s  gifts in magic became apparent when he was still a boy. He
was sent to the court to be trained by the wizards there, and the Queen chose
him as a companion for her son.

Maharion and Erreth-Akbe became “hearts brothers.” They spent ten years
together fighting the Kargs, whose occasional forays from the East had in
recent times become a slave-taking, colonising invasion. Venway, Torheven
and  the Torikles, Spevy, Perregal, and parts of Gont were under Kargish
dominion for a generation or longer. At Shelieth on Way, Erreth-Akbe worked
a    great magic against the Kargish forces, who had landed in “a thousand
ships” on Waymarsh and were swarming across the mainland. Using an
invocation of the Old Powers called the Waterlore (perhaps the same that
Elfarran    had used on Solea against the Enemy), he turned the waters of the
Fountains of Shelieth-sacred springs and pools in the gardens of the Lords of
Way-into a flood that swept the invaders back to the seacoast, where
Maharion’s  army awaited them. No ship of the fleet returned to Karego-At.


Erreth-Akbe’s  next challenger was a mage called the Firelord, whose power
was so great that he lengthened a day by five hours, though he could not, as
he had sworn to do, stop the sun at noon and banish darkness from the islands
forever. The Firelord took dragon form to fight Erreth-Akbe,  but was defeated
at  last, at the cost of the forests and cities of Ilien, which he set afire as 
he
fought.

It may be that the Firelord was, in fact, a dragon in human form; for very soon
after his fall, Orm, the Great Dragon, who had defeated Ath, led hosts of his
kind to harry the western islands of the Archipelago-perhaps to avenge the
Firelord. These fiery flights caused great terror, and hundreds of boats carried
people fleeing from Paln and Semel to the Inner Islands; but the dragons were
not doing as much damage as the Kargs, and Maharion judged the urgent
danger lay in the east. While he himself went west to fight dragons, he sent
Erreth-Akbe  east to try to establish peace with the King of the Kargad Lands.

Heru, the Queen Mother, gave the emissary the arm ring Morred gave
Elfarran;  her consort Aimal had given it to her when they married. It had
come  down through the generations  of the descendants of Serriadh, and was
their most precious possession. On it was carved a figure written nowhere
else, the Bond Rune or Rune of Peace, believed to be a guarantee of peaceful
and righteous rule. “Let the Kargish king wear Morred’s ring,” the Queen
Mother said. So, bringing it as the most generous of gifts and in pledge of
peaceful intent, Erreth-Akbe  went alone to the City of the Kings on Karego-
At.

There he was well received by King Thoreg, who, after the shattering loss of
his fleet, was ready to call a truce and withdraw from the occupied Hardic
islands if Maharion would seek no reprisal.

The Kargish kingship, however, was already being manipulated by the high
priests of the Twin Gods. Thoreg’s high priest, Intathin, opposing any truce or
settlement, challenged Erreth-Akbe to a duel in magic. Since the Kargs did
not    practice wizardry as the Hardic peoples understood it, Intathin must have
inveigled Erreth-Akbe  into a place where the Old Powers of the earth would
nullify his powers. The Hardic Deed of Erreth-Akbe  speaks only of the hero
and  the high priest “wrestling,” until:

the weakness of the old darkness came into Erreth-Akbe’s limbs,
the silence of the mother darkness into his mind.

Long he lay, forgetful of bright fame and brotherhood,
long, and on his breast lay the rune-ring broken.


The daughter of  “the wise king Thoreg” rescued Erreth-Akbe from this trance
or imprisoning spell and restored him his strength. He gave her the half  of the
Ring of Peace that remained to him. (From her it passed through her
descendants for over five hundred years to the last heirs of Thoreg, a brother
and     sister exiled on a deserted island of the East Reach; and the sister 
gave it
to Ged.) Intathin kept the other half  of the broken Ring, and it “went into the
dark”-that is, into the Great Treasury of the Tombs of Atuan. (There Ged
found         it, and rejoining the two halves and with them the lost Rune of 
Peace,
he and Tenar brought the Ring home to Havnor.)

The Kargish version of the story, told as a sacred recital by the priesthood,
says that Intathin defeated Erreth-Akbe, who “lost his staff  and amulet and
power” and crept back to Havnor a broken man. But wizards carried no staff
in those years, and Erreth-Akbe certainly was an unbroken man and a
powerful mage when he faced the dragon Orm.

King Maharion sought peace and never found it. While Erreth-Akbe  was in
Karego-At (which may have been a period of years), the depredations of the
dragons increased. The Inward Isles were troubled by refugees fleeing the
western lands and by interruptions to shipping and trade, since the dragons
had taken to setting fire to boats that went west of Hosk, and harried ships
even in the Inmost Sea. All the wizards and armed men Maharion could
command went out to fight the dragons, and he went with them himself four
times; but swords and arrows were little use against armored, fire-spouting,
flying enemies. Paln was “a plain of charcoal,” and villages and towns in the
west of Havnor had been burnt to the ground. The king’s wizards had spell-
caught and killed several dragons over the Pelnish Sea, which probably
increased the dragons’ ire. Just as Erreth-Akbe  returned, the Great Dragon
Orm flew to the City of Havnor and threatened the towers of the king’s palace
with fire.

Erreth-Akbe, sailing into the bay “with sails worn transparent  by the eastern
winds,” could not pause to “embrace his heart’s brother or greet his home.”
Taking dragon form himself, he flew to battle with Orm over Mount Onn.
“Flame and fire in the midnight air” could be seen from the palace in Havnor.
They flew north, Erreth-Akbe  in pursuit. Over the sea near Taon, Orm turned
again and this time wounded the mage so that he had to come down to earth
and take his own form. He came, with the dragon now following him, to the
Old Island, Ea, the first land Segoy raised from the sea. On that sacred and
powerful soil, he and Orm met. Ceasing their battle, they spoke as equals,
agreeing  to end the enmity of their races.

Unfortunately the king’s wizards, enraged at the attack on the heart of the
kingdom and heartened by their victory in the Pelnish Sea, had taken the fleet


on into the far West Reach and attacked the islets and rocks where the dragons
raised their young, killing many broods, “crushing monstrous eggs with iron
mauls.” Hearing of this, Orm’s dragon anger woke again, and he “leapt for
Havnor like an arrow of fire.” (Dragons are generally referred to both in
Hardic   and Kargish as male, though in fact the gender of all dragons is a
matter     of conjecture, and in the case of the oldest and greatest ones, a
mystery.)

Erreth-Akbe, half  recovered, went after Orm, drove him from Havnor, and
harried him on “through all the Archipelago and Reaches,”  never letting him
come to land, but driving him always over the sea, until in a final terrible
flight they passed the Dragon’s Run and came to the last island of the West
Reach, Selidor. There, on the outer beach, both exhausted, they faced each
other and fought, “talon and fire and word and sword,” until:

their blood ran mingled, making the sand red.
Their breath ceased. Their bodies by the loud sea
lay entangled. They entered death’s land together.

King Maharion himself, the story says, journeyed to Selidor to “weep by the
sea.” He retrieved Erreth-Akbe’s sword and set it atop the highest tower of his
palace.

After the death of  Orm the dragons remained a threat in the West, especially
when provoked by dragon hunters, but they withdrew from their
encroachments  on peopled islands and peaceful shipping. Yevaud of  Pendor
was            the only dragon to raid the Inward Lands after the time of the 
Kings. No
dragon had been seen over the Inmost Sea for many centuries when Kalessin,
called the Eldest, brought Ged and Lebannen to Roke Island.

Maharion died a few years after Erreth-Akbe, having seen no peace
established, and much unrest and dissent within his kingdom. It was widely
said    that since the Ring of  Peace was lost there could be no true king of
Earthsea. Mortally wounded in battle against the rebel lord Gehis of the
Havens, Maharion spoke a prophecy: “He shall inherit my throne who has
crossed the dark land living and come to the far shores of the day.”

THE DARK TIME, THE HAND, AND ROKE SCHOOL

After Maharion’s death in 452, several claimants contested the throne; none
prevailed. Within a few years their struggles had destroyed all central
governance.  The Archipelago became a battleground of hereditary feudal
princes, governments of small islands and city-states, and piratic warlords, 
all


trying to increase their wealth and extend or defend their borders. Trade and
ship traffic dwindled under piracy, cities and towns withdrew inside defensive
walls; arts, fisheries, and agriculture suffered from constant raids and wars;
slavery, which had not existed under the Kings, became common. Magic was
the primary weapon in forays and battles. Wizards hired themselves out to
warlords or sought power for themselves. Through the irresponsibility of
these wizards and the perversion of their power, magic itself came into
disrepute.

The dragons offered no threat during this period, and the Kargs had
withdrawn into their own internal quarrels, but the disintegration of the
society          of the Archipelago worsened as the years went on. Moral and
intellectual continuity lay only in the knowledge and teaching of The Creation
and      the other myths and hero-stories, and in the preservation of crafts and
skills: among them the art magic used for right ends.

The Hand, a loose-knit league or community concerned principally with the
understanding and the ethical use and teaching of magic, was established by
men and women on Roke Island about a hundred and fifty years after
Maharion’s death. Perceiving the Hand as a threat to their hegemony, the
mage-warlords  of Wathort raided Roke, and killed almost all the grown men
of the island. But the Hand had already stretched out to other islands all
around the Inmost Sea. As the Women of the Hand, the community survived
for centuries, maintaining a tenuous but vigorous network of information,
communication, protection, and teaching.

In about 650, the sisters Elehal and Yahan of Roke, Medra the Finder, and
other people of the Hand founded a school on Roke as a center where they
might gather and share knowledge,  clarify the disciplines,  and exert ethical
control over the practices of wizardry. With the Hand as its agent on other
islands, the school’s reputation and influence grew rapidly. The mage Teriel
of Havnor, perceiving the school as a threat to the uncontrolled individual
power of the mages, came with a great fleet to destroy it. He was destroyed,
and his fleet scattered.

This first victory went far to establish a reputation of invulnerability for the
school on Roke.

Under Roke’s steadily growing influence, wizardry was shaped into a
coherent body of knowledge,  its use increasingly controlled by moral and
political purpose. Wizards trained at the school went to other islands of the
Archipelago to work against warlords, pirates, and feuding nobles, preventing
raids    and forays, imposing penalties and settlements,  enforcing boundaries,
and protecting individuals,  farms, towns, cities, and shipping, until social
order was re-established. In the early years they were sent to enforce peace;


increasingly they were called on to maintain it. While the throne in Havnor
remained empty, for over two hundred years Roke School served effectively
as     the central government of the Archipelago.

The power of the Archmage of Roke was in many respects that of a king.
Ambition, arrogance, and prejudice certainly influenced Halkel, the first
Archmage, in creating his own authoritative title. Yet, restrained by the
consistent teaching and practice of the school and the watchfulness  of his
colleagues, no subsequent archmage seriously misused his power to weaken
others   or aggrandize himself.

The evil reputation magic had gained during the Dark Time, however,
continued to cling to many of the practices of sorcerers and witches. Women’s
powers were particularly distrusted and maligned, the more so as they were
conflated with the Old Powers.

Throughout  Earthsea, various springs, caves, hills, stones, and woods were
and always had been sites of  concentrated power and sacredness. All were
locally feared or venerated; some were known far and wide.

Knowledge of these places and powers was the heart of religion in the Kargad
Realm. In the Archipelago, the lore of the Old Powers was still part of the
profound, common basis of thought and reverence. On all the islands, the arts
mostly practiced by witches, such as midwifery, healing, animal husbandry,
dousing, mining and metallurgy,  planting and growing spells, love spells, and
so on, often invoked or drew upon the Old Powers. But the learned wizards of
Roke had generally come to distrust the ancient practices and made no appeal
to the “Powers of the Mother.” Only in Paln did wizards combine the two
practices, in the arcane, esoteric, and reputedly dangerous Pelnish Lore.

Though like any power they could be perverted to evil use in the service of
ambition (as was the Terrenon Stone in Osskil), the Old Powers were
inherently  sacral and pre-ethical. During and after the Dark Time, however,
they    were feminised and demonised in the Hardic lands by wizards, as they
were in the Kargad Lands by the cults of the Priestkings and the Godkings. So
by the eighth century, in the Inner Lands of the Archipelago, only village
women kept up rituals and offerings at the old sites. They were despised or
abused for doing so. Wizards kept clear of such places. On Roke, itself  the
center  of the Old Powers in all Earthsea, the profoundest manifestations of
those powers-Roke Knoll and the Immanent Grove-were never spoken of as
such. Only the Patterners, who lived all their lives in the Grove, served to 
link
human arts and acts to the older sacredness of the earth, reminding the
wizards   and mages that their power was not theirs, but lent to them.

HISTORY OF THE KARGAD LANDS


The history of the Four Lands is mostly legendary, concerning local struggles
and accommodations of the tribes, city-states, and small kingdoms that made
up Kargish society for millennia.

Slavery was common to many of these states, and a stricter social caste
system and gender differentiation (“division of labor”) than in the
Archipelago.

Religion was a unifying element even among the most warlike tribes. There
were hundreds of Truce Places on the Four Lands, where no warfare or
dispute was permitted. Kargish religion was a domestic and community
worship    of the Old Powers, the chthonic or gaean forces manifest as spirits 
of
place. They were worshiped at the site and at home altars with offerings of
flowers, oil, food, dances, races, sacrifices, carvings, songs, music, and
silence. Worship was both casual and ritual, private and communal. There was
no priesthood;  any adult could perform the ceremonies and teach children to
do so. This ancient spiritual practice has continued, unofficially and
sometimes in hiding, under the newer, institutional religions of the Twin Gods
and     the Godking.

Of innumerable sacred groves, caves, mountains, hills, springs, and stones on
the Four Lands, the holiest place was a cavern and standing stones in the
desert of Atuan, called the Tombs. It was a center of  pilgrimage from the
earliest recorded times, and the kings of Atuan and later of Hupun maintained
a hostel there for all who came to worship.

Six to seven hundred years ago a sky-god religion began to spread across the
islands, a development of the worship of the Twin Gods Atwah and Wuluah,
originally heroes of a desert saga from Hur-at-Hur.  A Sky Father was added as
head of the pantheon, and a priestly caste developed to lead the rites. Without
suppressing the worship of the Old Powers, the priests of the Twin Gods and
the Sky Father began to professionalise religion, managing the rituals and
festivals, building increasingly costly temples, and controlling  public
ceremonies  such as marriages, funerals, and the installation of officials.

The hierarchic and centralising  tendency of this religion lent support at 
first to
the ambition of the Kings of Hupun on Karego-At. By force of arms and
diplomatic maneuvering, the House of Hupun within a century or so
conquered or absorbed most of the other Kargad kingdoms,  of which there
had been more than two hundred.

When (in the year 440, by Hardic count) Erreth-Akbe  came to make peace
between the Archipelago and the Kargad Lands, bearing the Bond Ring as
pledge of his king’s sincerity, he came to Hupun as the capital of the Kargad
Empire and treated with King Thoreg as its ruler.


But for some decades the kings of Hupun had been in conflict with the high
priest and his followers in Awabath, the Holy City, fifty miles from Hupun.
The priests of the Twin Gods were in the process of wresting power from the
kings and making Awabath not only the religious but the political center of
the country. Erreth-Akbe’s visit seems to have coincided with the final shift of
power from the kings to the priests. King Thoreg received him with honor,

but Intathin the High Priest fought with him, defeated or deceived him, and
for a time imprisoned him. The Ring that was to bond the two kingdoms was
broken.

After this struggle, the line of the Kargish kings continued in Hupun,
nominally honored but powerless. The Four Lands were governed from
Awabath.   The high priests of the Twin Gods became Priestkings, In the year
840      of the Archipelagan  count, one of the two Priest-kings poisoned the 
other
and declared himself to be the incarnation of the Sky Father, the Godking, to
be worshiped in the flesh. Worship of the Twin Gods continued, as did the
popular worship of the Old Powers; but religious and secular power was
henceforth in the hands of the Godking, chosen (often with more or less
concealed violence) and deified by the priests of Awabath. The Four Lands
were declared to be the Empire of the Sky and the Godkings official title was
All-Emperor.

The last heirs of the House of Hupun were a boy and girl, Ensar and Anthil.
Wishing to end the line of the Kargish kings but unwilling to risk sacrilege by
shedding royal blood, the Godking ordered these children to be stranded on a
desert island. Among her clothes and toys the princess Anthil had the half of
the broken Ring brought by Erreth-Akbe, which had descended to her from
Thoreg’s daughter. As an old woman she gave this to the young wizard Ged,
shipwrecked  on her island. Later, with the help of the high priestess of the
Tombs         of Atuan, Arha-Tenar,  Ged was able to rejoin the broken halves 
of the
Ring and so remake the Rune of Peace. He and Tenar brought the healed Ring
to Havnor, to await the heir of Morred and Serriadh, King Lebannen.

Magic

Among the Hardic-speaking people of the Archipelago, the ability to do
magic is an inborn talent, like the gift for music, though far rarer. Most 
people
lack it entirely. In a few people, perhaps one in a hundred, it is a latent,
cultivable talent. In a very few people it is manifest without training.

The gift for magic is empowered mainly by the use of the True Speech, the
Language of the Making, in which the name of a thing is the thing.

This speech, innate to dragons, can be learned by human beings. Some few
people are born with an untaught knowledge of at least some words of the


Language of the Making. The teaching of it is the heart of the teaching of
magic.

The true name of a person is a word in the True Speech. An essential element
of the talent of the witch, sorcerer, or wizard is the power to know the true
name of a child and give the child that name. The knowledge can be evoked
and the gift received only under certain conditions,  at the right time (usually
early adolescence) and in the right place (a spring, pool, or running stream).

Since the name of the person is the person, in the most literal and absolute
sense, anyone who knows it has real power, power of life and death, over the
person. Often a true name is never known to anybody but the giver and to the
owner, who both keep it secret all their life. The power to give the true name
and the imperative to keep it secret are one. True names have been betrayed,
but never by the name giver.

Some people of great innate and trained power are able to find out the true
name of another, or even to have it come to them unsought. Since such
knowledge can be betrayed or misused, it is immensely dangerous.  Ordinary
people-and dragons-keep  their true name secret; wizards hide and defend
theirs       with spells. Morred could not even begin to fight his Enemy until 
he
saw his Enemy’s name written in the dust by the falling rain. Ged could force
the dragon Yevaud to obey him, having by both wizardry and scholarship
discovered Yevaud’s true name under centuries of false ones.

Magic was a wild talent before the time of Morred, who as both king and
mage established intellectual and moral discipline for the art magic, gathering
wizards to work together at the court for the general good and to study the
ethical bases and constraints of their practice.

This harmony generally prevailed through the reign of Maharion. In the Dark
Time, with no control over wizardly powers and widespread misuse of them,
magic came into general disrepute.

THE SCHOOL ON  ROKE

The school was founded in about 650, as described above. The Nine Masters
or master-teachers of Roke were originally:

Windkey, master of the spells controlling weather
Hand, master of all illusions

Herbal, master of the arts of healing

Changer, master of the spells that transform matter and bodies

Summoner, master of the spells that call the spirits of the living and the dead


Namer, master of the knowledge of the True Speech

Patterner, dweller in the Immanent Grove, master of meaning and intent
Finder, master of the spells of finding, binding, and returning
Doorkeeper, master of the entering and leaving of the Great House

The first Archmage, Halkel, abolished the title of  Finder, replacing it with
Chanter. The Chanter’s task is the preservation and teaching of all the oral
deeds, lays, songs, etc., and the sung spells.

The original loose, roughly descriptive use of the words witch, sorcerer,
wizard, was codified into a strict hierarchy by Halkel. Under his rules:

Witchery was restricted to women. All magic practiced by women was called
“base craft,” even when it included practices otherwise called “high arts,”
such  as healing, chanting, changing, etc. Witches were to learn only from one
another or from sorcerers. They were forbidden to enter Roke School, and
Halkel discouraged wizards from teaching women anything at all. He
specifically forbade the teaching of any word of the True Speech to women,
and   though this proscription was widely ignored, it led in the long run to a
profound, long-lasting loss of knowledge and power among the women who
practiced magic.

Sorcery was practiced by men-its only real distinction  from witchery.
Sorcerers trained one another, and had some knowledge  of the True Speech.
Sorcery included both base crafts as defined by Halkel (finding, mending,
dousing, animal healing, etc.) and some high arts (human healing, chanting,
weatherworking). A student who showed a gift for sorcery and was sent to
Roke              for training would first study the high arts of sorcery, and 
if successful
in them might pursue his training in the art magic, especially in naming,
summoning, and patterning, and so become a wizard.

A wizard, as Halkel defined the term, was a man who received his staff from a
teacher, himself a wizard, who had taken special responsibility for his
training. It was usually the Archmage who gave a student his staff and made
him wizard. This kind of teaching and succession occurred elsewhere than
Roke-notably on Paln-but the Masters of Roke came to regard with suspicion
a student of anyone not trained on Roke.

Mage remained an essentially undefined term: a wizard of great power.

The name and office of archmage were invented by Halkel, and the Archmage
of Roke was a tenth Master, never counted among the Nine. A vital ethical
and intellectual force, the archmage also exerted considerable political power.


On the whole this power was used benevolently. Maintaining Roke as a strong
centralising,  normalising, pacific element in Archipelagan society, the
archmages sent out sorcerers and wizards trained to understand the ethical
practice of magic and to protect communities from drought, plague, invaders,
dragons, and the unscrupulous use of their art.

Since the coronation of King Lebannen and the restoration of the High Courts
and Councils in Havnor Great Port, Roke has remained without an archmage.
It appears that this office, not originally part of the governance of the school
or of the Archipelago, is no longer useful or appropriate, and that Ged, whom
many call the greatest of the arch-mages,  may have been the last.

CELIBACY AND WIZARDRY

Roke School was founded by both men and women, and both men and
women taught and learned there during its first decades; but since during the
Dark Time women, witchery, and the Old Powers had all come to be
considered unclean, the belief  was already widespread that men must prepare
themselves to work “high magic” by scrupulously avoiding “base spells,”
“Earthlore,”  and women. A man unwilling to put himself  under the iron
control            of a spell of  chastity could never practice the high arts. 
He could be no
more than a common sorcerer. Male wizards thus had come to avoid women,
refusing to teach them or learn from them. Witches, who almost universally
went    on working magic without giving up their sexuality, were described by
celibate men as temptresses,  unclean, defiling, essentially wicked.

When in 730 the first Archmage of  Roke, Halkel of Way, excluded women
from the school, among his Nine Masters only the Patterner and the
Doorkeeper  protested; they were overruled. For more than three centuries, no
woman taught or studied at the school on Roke. During those centuries,
wizardry was an honored art, conferring status and power, while witchery was
an unclean and ignorant superstition,  practiced by women, paid for by
peasants.

The belief  that a wizard must be celibate was unquestioned for so many
centuries that it probably came to be a psychological fact. Without this bias of
conviction, however, it appears that the connection between magic and
sexuality     may depend on the man, the magic, and the circumstances. There is
no doubt that so great a mage as Morred was a husband and father.

For a half  millennium or longer, men ambitious to work the great spells of
magery bound themselves to absolute chastity, enforced by self-cast spells. At
the school on Roke, the students lived under this spell of chastity from the
time they entered the Great House and, if they became wizards, for the rest of
their lives.


Among sorcerers, few are strictly celibate, and many marry and bring up a
family.

Women who work magic may practice periods of celibacy as well as fasting
and other disciplines believed to purify and concentrate power; but most
witches lead active sexual lives, having more freedom than most village
women and less need to fear abuse. Many pledge “witch-troth” with another
witch or an ordinary woman. They do not often marry men, and if they do,
they are likely to choose a sorcerer.


