
I

IT WAS WANG LUNG'S MARRIAGE DAY. AT FIRST,
opening his eyes in the blackness of the curtains about his
bed, he could not think why the dawn seemed different
from any other. The house was still except for the faint,
gasping cough of his old father, whose room was opposite
to his own across the middle room. Every morning the old
man's cough was the first sound to be heard. Wang Lung
usually lay listening to it, and moved only when he heard
it approaching nearer and when he heard the door of his
father's room squeak upon its wooden hinges.

But this morning he did not wait. He sprang up and
pushed aside the curtains of his bed. It was a dark, ruddy
dawn, and through a small square hole of a window, where
the tattered paper fluttered, a glimpse of bronze sky
gleamed. He went to the hole and tore the paper away.

'It is spring and I do not need this,' he muttered.

He was ashamed to say aloud that he wished the house
to look neat on this day. The hole was barely large enough
to admit his hand, and he thrust it out to feel of the air.
A small soft wind blew gently from the east, a wind mild
and murmurous and full of rain. It was a good omen. The
fields needed rain for fruition. There would be no rain
this day, but within a few days, if this wind continued,
there would be water. It was good. Yesterday he had said
to his father that if this brazen, glittering sunshine contin-
ued, the wheat could not fill in the ear. Now it was as if
Heaven had chosen this day to wish him well. Earth would
bear fruit.

He hurried out into the middle room, drawing on his
blue outer trousers as he went, and knotting about the full-
ness at his waist his girdle of blue cotton cloth. He left
his upper body bare until he had heated water to bathe him-
self. He went into the shed which was the kitchen, leaning
against the house, and out of its dusk an ox twisted its
hUad from behind the corner next the door and lowed at



him deeply. The kitchen was made of earthen bricks :
the house was, great squares of earth dug from their ow
fields, and thatched with straw from their own wheat. Out
of their own earth had his grandfather in his youth fashion-
ed also the oven, baked and black with many years of
meal-preparing. On top of this earthen structure stood a
deep, round, iron cauldron.

This cauldron he filled partly full of water, dipping it
with a half-gourd from an earthen jar that stood neat, but
he dippped cautiously, for water was precious. Then, after a
hesitation, he suddenly lifted the jar and emptied all the
water into the cauldron. This day he would bathe his whole
body. Not since he was a child upon his mother's knee had
any one looked upon his body. To-day one would, and he
would have it clean.

He went around the oven to the rear, and selecting a
handful of the dry grass and stalks standing in the corner
of the kitchen, he arranged it delicately in the mouth of
the oven, making the most of every leaf. Then from an old
flint and iron he caught a flame and thrust it into the straw
and there was a blaze.

This was the last morning he would have to light the,
fire.. He had lit it every morning since his mother died six
years before. He had lit the fire, boiled water, and poured
the water into a bowl and taken it into the room where
his father sat upon his bed, coughing and fumbling for his
("shoes upon the floor. Every morning for these six years
the old man had waited for his son to bring in hot water
to ease him of his morning coughing. Now father and son
1 could rest. There was a woman coming to the house. Never
again would Wang Lung have to rise summer and winter
at dawn to light the fire. He could lie in his bed and wait,
! and he also would have a bowl of water brought to him,
\ and if the earth were fruitful there would be tea-leaves in
' the water. Once in some years it was so.
-~ And if the woman wearied there would be her children
! to light the fire, the many children she would bear to
I Wang Lung. Wang Lung stopped, struck by the thought
of children running in and out of their three rooms. Three
rooms had always seemed much to them, a house half-empi y

6



since his mother died. They were always having to resist
relatives who were more crowded — his uncle, with his end-
less brood of children, coaxing.

'Now, how can two lone men need so much room? Can-
not father and son sleep together? The warmth of the
young one's body will comfort the old one's cough.'

But the father always replied, 'I am saving my bed for
my grandson. He wil} warm my bones in my age.'

Now the grandsons were coming — grandsons upon
grandsons ! They would have to put beds along the walls
and in the middle room. The house would be full of beds.
The blaze of the oven died down while Wang Lung thought
of all the beds there would be in the half-empty house, and
the water began to chill in the cauldron. The shadowy fig-
ure of the old man appeared in the doorway, holding his
unbuttoned garments about him. He was coughing and
spitting, and he gasped :

'How is it that there is not water yet to heat my lungs ?'

Wang Lung stared and recalled himself and was ashamed.

'This fuel is damp,' he muttered from behind the stove.
'The damp wind. '

The old man continued to cough perseveringly, and
would not cease until the water boiled. Wang Lung dipped
some into a bowl, and then, after a moment, he opened a
glazed jar that stood upon a ledge of the stove and took
from it a dozen or so of the curled dried leaves and sprin-
kled them upon the surface of the water, The old man's eyes
opened greedily and immediately he began to complain.

'Why are you wasteful? Tea is like eating silver.'

'It is the day,' replied Wang Lung with a short laugh.
'Eat and be comforted.'

The old man grasped the bowl in his shrivelled, knotty
fingers, muttering, uttering little grunts. He watched the
leaves uncurl and spread upon the surface of the water,
unable to bear drinking the precious stuff.

'It will be cold,' said Wang Lung.

'True — true,' said the old man in alarm, and he began
to take great gulps of the hot tea. He passed into an animal
satisfaction, like a child fixed upon its feeding. But he was
jot too forgetful to see Wang Lung dipping the water reck-



7



lessly from the cauldron into a deep wooden tub. He lifted I
his head and stared at his son.

'Now there is water enough to bring a crop to fruit,' hel
said suddenly.

Wang Lung continued to dip the water to the last drop. 1
He did not answer.

'Now then!' cried his father loudly.

M have not washed my body all at once since the Newl
Year,' said Wang Lung in a low voice.

He was ashamed to say to his father that he wished hisl
body to be clean for a woman to see. He hurried out, carry- 1
ing the tub to his own room, The door was hung looselyl
upon a warped wooden frame and it did not shut closely,!
and the old man tottered into the middle room and put hisl
mouth to the opening and bawled.

'It will be ill if we start the woman like this — tea in th el
morning water and all this washing!'

c It is only one day/ shouted Wang Lung. And then hef
added, 'I will throw the water oh the earth when I am finJ
ished and it is not all waste.'

The old man was silent at this, and Wang Lung unfasten-8
ed his girdle and stepped out of his clothing. In the HghtB
that streamed in a square block from the hole he wrung al}
small towel from the steaming water and he scrubbed
his dark, slender body vigorously. Warm though he had
thought the air, when his flesh was wet he was cold, and he
moved quickly, passing the towel in and out of the water
until from his whole body there went up a delicate cloud
of steam. Then he went to a box that had been his mother's
and drew from it a fresh suit of blue cotton cloth. He might
be a little cold this day without the wadding of the winter I
garments, but he suddenly could not bear to put them on
against his clean flesh. The covering of them was torn and
filthy and the wadding stuck out of the holes, grey and sod-
den. He did not want this woman to see him for the first
time with the wadding sticking out of his clothes. Later
she would have to wash and mend, but not the first day. \
He drew over the blue cotton coat and trousers a long robe
made of the same material — his one long robe, which he
wore on feast days only, ten days or so in the year, dil
8



told. Then with swift fingers he unplaited the long braid
of hair that hung down his back, and taking a wooden
comb from the drawer of the small, unsteady table, he be-
gan to comb out his hair.

His father drew near again and put his mouth to the
crack of the door.

'Am I to have nothing to eat this day?' he complained.
'At my age the bones are water in the morning until food
is given them.'

'I am coming,' said Wang Lung, braiding his hair quick-
ly and smoothly and weaving into the strands a tasselled,
black silk cord.

Then after a moment he removed his long gown and
wound his braid about his head and went out, carrying
the tub of water. He had quite forgotten the breakfast. He
would stir a little water into corn meal and give it to his
father. For himself he could not eat. He staggered with the
tub to the threshold and poured the water upon the earth
nearest the door, and as he did so he remembered he had
used all the water in the cauldron for his bathing and he
would have to start the fire again. A wave of anger passed
over him at his father.

'That old head thinks of nothing except his eating and
his drinking,' he muttered into the mouth of the oven;
but aloud he said nothing. It was the last morning he would
have to prepare food for the old man. He put a very little
water into the cauldron, drawing it in a bucket from the
well near the door, and it boiled quickly and he stirred meal
together and took it to the old man.

'We will have rice this night, my father,' he said. 'Mean-
while, here is corn.'

'There is only a little rice left in the basket,' said the
old man, seating himself at the table in the middle room
and stirring with his chopsticks the thick yellow gruel.

'We will eat a little less then at the spring festival,' said
Wang Lung. But the old man did not hear. He was supping
loudly at his bowl.

Wang Lung went into his own room, then, and drew
about him again the long blue robe and let down the braid
of his hair. He passed his hand over his shaven brow and



9



over his cheeks. Perhaps he had better he newly shaven?
It was scarcely sunrise yet. He could pass through the Street
of the Barbers and be shaved before he went to the house
where the woman waited for him. If he had the money he
would do it.

He took from his girdle a small, greasy pouch of grey
cloth and counted the money in it. There were six silver
dollars and a double handful of copper coins. He had not,
yet told his father he had asked friends to sup that night.
He had asked his male cousin, the young son of his uncle,
and his uncle for his father's sake, and three neighbouring
farmers who lived in the village with him. He had planned
to bring back from the town that morning pork, a small
pond fish, and a handful of chestnuts. He might even buy
a few of the bamboo sprouts from the south and a little
beef to stew with the cabbage he had raised in his own
garden. But this only if there were any money left after
the bean oil and the soy-bean sauce had been bought. If .
he shaved his head he could not, perhaps, buy the beef.
Well, he would shave his head, he decided suddenly.

He left the old man without speech and went out into
the early morning. In spite of the dark red dawn the sun
was mounting the horizon clouds and sparkled upon the
dew on the rising wheat and barley. The farmer in Wang
Lung was diverted for an instant and he stooped to ex-
amine the budding heads. They were empty as yet and wait-
ing for the rain. He smelled the air and looked anxiously at
the sky. Rain was there, dark in the clouds, heavy upon the
wind. He would buy a stick of incense and place it in the
little temple to the Earth God. On a day like this he would
do it.

He wound his way in among the fields upon the narrow
path. In the near distance the grey city wall arose. .Within
that gate in the wall through which he would pass stood
the great house where the woman had been a slave girl
since her childhood, the House of Hwang. There were
those who said, Tt is better to live alone than to marry a
woman who has been slave in a great house.' But when
he had said to his father, 'Am I never to have a woman?'
his father replied, 'With weddings costing as they do in

10



these evil days and every woman wanting gold rings and
silk clothes before she will take a man, there remain only
slaves to be had for the poor.'

His father had stirred himself then, and gone to the
House of Hwang and asked if there were a slave to spare.

'Not a slave too young, and above all, not a pretty one,'
he had said.

Wang Lung had suffered because she must not be pretty;
it would have been something to have had a pretty wife
that other men would congratulate him upon having. His
father, seeing his mutinous face, cried out at him:

'And what will we do with a pretty woman? We must
have a ^OTnw^hr>-will tend the house and bear children
as she works in the fields, and will a pretty woman do
these things? She will be for ever thinking about clothes
to go with her face! No, n ot a pretty woman in our house.
We are farmers. Moreover,~wEo has heard of a pretty slave
who was virgin in a wealthy house? All the young lords
have had their fill of her. It is better to be first with an
ugly woman than the hundredth with a beauty. Do you
imagine a pretty woman will think your farmer's hands as
pleasing as the soft hands of a rich man's son, and your ;
sun-black face as beautiful as the golden skin of the others
who have had her for their pleasure?'

Wang Lung knew his father spoke well. Nevertheless,
he had "to struggle with his flesh before he could answer.
And then he said violently:

'At least, I will not have a woman who is pock-marked,
or who has a split upper lip.'

' We will have to see what is to be had,' his father replied.
Well, the woman was not pock-marked, nor had she a
split upper lip. This much he knew, but nothing more.
He and his father had bought two silver rings, washed with
gold, and silver ear-rings, and these his father had taken
to the woman's owner^in acknowledgment of betrothal.
Beyond this, he knew nothing of the woman who was to
be his, except that on this day he could go and get her.

He walked into the cool darkness of the city gate. Wa-
ter-carriers, just outside, their barrows laden with great
tubs of water, passed to and fro all day, the water splash-



1 1



ing out of the tubs upon the stones. It was always wet and
cool in the tunnel of the gate under the thick wall of earth
and brick — cool even upon a summer's day — so that the
melon vendors spread their fruits upon the stones, melons
split open to drink in the moist coolness. There were none
yet, for the season was too early, but baskets of small, Tiard
green peaches stood along the walls, and the vendors cried
out:

c The first peaches of spring — the first peaches! Buy, eat,
purge your bowels of the poisons of winter!'
Wang Lung said to himself :

If she likes them, I will buy her a handful when we re-
turn.' He could not realise that when he walked back
through the gate there would be a woman walking behind
him.

He turned to the right within the gate and after a mo-,
ment was in the Street of Barbers. There were few before
him so early, only some farmers who had carried their pro-
duce into the town the night before in order that they
might sell their vegetables at the dawn markets and return
for the day's work in the fields. They had slept shivering
and crouching over their baskets, the baskets now empty at
their feet. Wang Lung avoided them lest some recognise
him, for he wanted none of their joking on this day. All
down the street in a long line the barbers stood behind
their small stalls, and Wang Lung went to the farthest one
and sat down upon the stool and motioned to the barber
who stood chattering to his neighbour. The barber came
at once and began quickly to pour hot water, from a kettle
on his pot of charcoal, into his brass basin.

'Shave everything?' he said in a professional tone.

'My head and my face,' replied Wang Lung.

'Ears and nostrils cleaned?' asked the barber.

'How much will that cost extra?' asked Wang Lung
cautiously.

'Fourpence,' said the barber, beginning to pass a black
cloth in and out of the hot water.

'I will give you two,' said Wang Lung.

'The > I will clean one ear and one nostril/ rejoined the
barber promptly. 'On which side of the face do you wish



I 2



it done?' He grimaced at the next barber as he spoke, and
the other burst into a guffaw. Wang Lung perceived that [
he had fallen into the hands of a joker, and feeling inferior \
in some unaccountable way, as he always did, to these town- >
dwellers, even though they were only barbers and the low-
est of persons, he said quickly:
'As you will — as you will '

Then he submitted himself to the barber's soaping and
rubbing and shaving, and being after all a generous fellow
enough, the barber gave him without extra charge a series
of skilful poundings upon his shoulders and back to loosen
his muscles. He commented upon Wang Lung as he shaved
his upper forehead :

'This would not be a bad-looking farmer if he would
cut off his hair. The new fashion is to take off the braid.'

His razor hovered so near the circle of hair upon Wang
Lung's crown that Wang Lung cried out:

'I cannot cut it off without asking my father!' And the
barber laughed and skirted the round spot of hair.

When it was finished and the money counted into the
barber's wrinkled, water-soaked hand, Wang Lung had a
moment of horror. So much money! But walking down
the street again with the wind fresh upon his shaven skin,
he said to himself:

'It is only once.'

He went to the market, then, and bought two pounds
of pork and watched the butcher as he wrapped it in a
dried lotus leaf, and then, hesitating, he bought- also six
ounces of beef. When all had been bought, even two fresh
squares of bean-curd, shivering in a jelly upon its leaf, he
went to a candlemaker's shop and there he bought a pair
of incense sticks. Then he turned his steps with great shy-
ness toward the House of Hwang.

Once at the gate of the house he was seized with terror. ]
How had he come alone? He should have asked his father — '
his uncle — even his nearest neighbour, Ching — any one to
come with him. He had never been in a great house before.
How could he go in with his wedding feast on his arm,
and say, 'I have come for a woman?'

He stood at the gate for a long time, looking at it. It

*3



was closed fast; two great wooden gates, painted black and
bound and studded with iron, closed upon each other.
Two lions made of stone stood on guard, one at either side.
There was no one else. He turned away. It was impossible.

He felt suddenly faint. He would go first and buy a
little food. He had eaten nothing — had forgotten food. He
went into a small street-restaurant, and putting twopence
upon the table he sat down. A dirty waiting-boy with a
shiny black apron came near and he called out to him,
'Two bowls of noodles!' And when they were come, he
ate them down greedily, pushing them into his mouth with
his bamboo chopsticks, while the boy stood and spun the
coppers between his black thumb and forefinger.

'Will you have more?' asked the boy indifferently.

Wang Lung shook his head. He sat up and looked a-J
bout. There was no one he knew in the small, dark, crowd-
ed room full of tables. Only a few men sat eating or drink-
ing tea. It was a place for poor men, and among them he
looked neat and clean and almost well-to-do, so that a
beggar passing, whined at him:

'Have a good heart, teacher, and give me a small cash —
I starve!'

Wang Lung had never had a beggar ask of him before,
nor had any even called him "teacher". He was pleased and
he threw into the beggar's bowl two small cash, which are
one-fifth of a penny, and the beggar pulled back with swift-
ness his black claw of a hand, and grasping the cash, fum-
bled them within his rags.

Wang Lung sat and the sun climbed upwards. The wait-
ing-boy lounged about impatiently. 'If you are buying no-
thing more,' he said at last with much impudence, 'you
will have to pay rent for the stool.'

Wang Lung was incensed at such impudence, and he
would have risen except that when he. thought of going
into the great House of Hwang and of asking there for a
woman, sweat broke out over his whole body as though he
were working in a field.

'Bring me tea,' he said weakly to the boy. Before he
could turn it was there and the small boy demanded sharply :

'Where is the penny?'



i4



And Wang Lung, to his horror, found there was nothing
to do but to produce from his girdle yet another penny.

'It is robbery/ he muttered, unwilling. Then he saw
entering the shop his neighbour whom he had invited to
the feast, and he put the penny hastily upon the table and
drank the tea at a gulp and went out quickly by the side
door and was once more upon the street.

'It is to be done/ he said to himself desperately, and
slowly he turned his way to the great gates.

This time, since it was after nigh noon, the gates were
ajar and the keeper of the gate idled upon the threshold,
picking his teeth with a bamboo sliver after his meal. He
was a tall fellow with a large mole upon his left cheek, and
from the mole hung three long black hairs which had never
been cut. When Wang Lung appeared he shouted roughly,
thinking from the basket that he had come to sell something.

'Now then, what?'

With great difficulty Wang Lung replied :
'I am Wang Lung, the farmer.'

'Well, and Wang Lung, the farmer, what?' retorted the •
gateman, who was polite to none except the rich friends
of his master and mistress.

'I am come — I am come ' faltered Wang Lung.

'That I see/ said the gateman with elaborate patience,
twisting the long hairs of his mole.

'There is a woman/ said Wang Lung, his voice sink-
ing, in spite of himself, to a whisper. In the sunshine his
face was wet.

The gateman gave a great laugh.

'So you are he!' he roared. 'I was told to expect a bride-
groom to-day. But I did not recognise you with a basket
on your arm.'

'It is only a few meats/ said Wang Lung apologetically,
waiting for the gateman to lead him within. But the gate-
man did not move. At last Wang Lung said with anxiety:

'Shall I go alone?'

The gateman affected a start of horror. 'The Old Lord
would kill you!'

Then seeing that Wang Lung was too innocent he said:
'A little silver is a good key.'



15



Wang Lung saw at last that the man wanted money of 1
him.

'I am a poor man,' he said pleadingly.
'Let me see what you have in your girdle,' said the gate-]
man.

And he grinned when Wang Lung in his simplicity >
j actually put his basket upon the stones and lifting his robel
took out the small bag from his girdle and shook into his
left hand what money was left after his purchases. There
was one silver piece and fourteen copper pence.

'I will take the silver,' said the gateman coolly, and be-
fore Wang Lung could protest the man had the silver in
his sleeve and was striding through the gate bawling
loudly:

'The bridegroom — the bridegroom!'.

Wang Lung, in spite of anger at what had just hap-
pened and horror at this loud announcing of his coming,
could do nothing but follow, and this he did, picking up
his basket and looking neither to the right nor to the left.

Afterwards, although it was the first time he had ever
been in a great family's house, he could remember nothing.
With his face burning and his head bowed, he walked
through court after court, hearing that voice roaring ahead
of him, hearing tinkles of laughter on every side. Then
suddenly when it seemed to him he had gone through a
hundred courts, the gateman fell silent and pushed him
into a small waiting-room. There he stood alone while the
gateman went into some inner place, returning in a mo-
ment to say:

'The Old Mistress says you are to appear before her.'

Wang Lung started forward, but the gateman stopped
him, crying in disgust:

'You cannot appear before a great lady with a basket
on your arm — a basket of pork and bean-curd! How will
you bow!'

'True — true ' said Wang Lung in agitation. But he

did not dare to put the basket down because he was afraid
something might be stolen from it. It did not occur to-
him that all the world might not desire such delicacies as
two pounds of pork and six ounces of beef and a small

16



pond-fish. The gateman saw his fear and cried out in great
contempt:

'In a house like this we feed these meats to the dogs!'
and seizing the basket he thrust it behind the door and
pushed Wang Lung ahead of him.

Down a long, narrow veranda they went, the roofs sup-
ported by delicate carven posts, and into a hall the like of
which Wang Lung had never seen. A score of houses such
as his whole house could have been put into it and have
disappeared, so wide were the spaces, so high the roofs.
Lifting his head in wonder to see the great carven and
painted beams above him, he stumbled upon the high
threshold of the door and would have fallen except that
the gateman caught his arm and cried out:

'Now will you be so polite as to fall on your face like
this before the Old Mistress?'

And collecting himself in great shame Wang Lung look-
ed ahead of him, and upon a dais in the centre of the
room he saw a very old lady, her small, fine body clothed
in lustrous, pearly grey satin, and upon the low bench be-
side her a pipe of opium stood burning over its little
lamp. She looked at him out of small, sharp, black eyes,
as sunken and sharp as a monkey's eyes, in her thin and
wrinkled face. The skin of her hand that held the pipe's
end was stretched over her little bones as smooth and as
yellow as the gilt upon an idol. Wang Lung fell to his
knees and knocked his head on the tiled floor.

'Raise him,' said the old lady gravely to the gateman;
'these obeisances are not necessary. Has he come for the
woman?' .

'Yes, Ancient One,' replied the gateman.

'Why does he not speak for himself?' asked the old
lady.

'Because he is a fool, Ancient One/ said the gateman,
twirling the hairs of his mole.

This roused Wang Lung and he looked with indigna-
tion at the gateman.

'I am only a coarse person, Great and Ancient Lady,' he
said. 'I do not know what words to use in such a presence.'

The old lady looked at him carefully and with perfect

17

5056, 2.



gravity and made as though she would have spoken, except
that her hand closed upon the pipe which a slave had been
tending for her and at once she seemed to forget him. She
bent and sucked greedily at the pipe for a moment and the
sharpness passed from her eyes and a film of forgetfulness
came over them. Wang Lung remained standing before
her until, in passing, her eyes caught his figure.

' What is this man doing here?' she asked with sudden
anger. It was as though she had forgotten everything. The
gateman's face was immovable. He said nothing.

C I am waiting for the woman, Great Lady,' said Wang
Lung in much astonishment.

'The woman? What woman ' the old lady began,

but the slave girl at her side stooped and whispered and
the lady recovered herself. 'Ah, yes, I forgot for the mo-
ment — a small affair — you have come for the slave called
O-lan. I remember we promised her to some farmer in
marriage. You are that farmer?'

'I am he/ replied Wang Lung.

'Call O-lan quickly,' said the old lady to Jber slave. It
was as though she was suddenly impatient to be done with
all this and to be left alone in the stillness of the great room
with her opium pipe.

And in an instant the slave appeared leading by the hand
a square, rather tall figure, clothed in clean blue cotton
coat and trousers. Wang Lung glanced once and then away,
his heart beating. This was his woman.

'Come here, slave,' said the old lady carelessly. 'This,
man has come for you.'

The woman went before the lady and stood with bowed
head and hands clasped,
p 'Are you ready?' asked the lady.

The woman answered slowly as an echo, 'Ready.'
' Wang Lung, hearing her voice for the first time, looked
! at her back as she stood before him. It was a good enough
voice, not loud, not soft, plain, and not ill-tempered. The
; woman's hair was neat and smooth and her coat clean.
I He saw with an instant's disappointement that her feet were
not bound. But this he could not dwell upon, for the old
lady was saying to the gateman.

18



"Carry her box out to the gate and let them begone.'
And then she called Wang Lung and said, 'Stand beside
her while I speak.' And when Wang had come forward
she said to him, e This woman came into our house when
she was a child of ten and here she has lived until now,
when she is twenty years old. I bought her in a year of
famine when her parents came south because they had
nothing to eat. They were from the north in Shantung
and there they returned, and I know nothing further of
them. You see she has the strong body and the square
cheeks of her kind. She will work well for you in the field
and drawing water and all else that you wish. She is not
beautiful, but that you do not need. Only men of leisure
have the need for beautiful women to divert them. Neither
is she clever. But she does well what she is told to do and
she has a good temper. So far as I know she is virgin. She
has not beauty enough to tempt my sons and grandsons
even if she had not been in the kitchen. If there has been
anything it has been only a serving man. But with the innu-
merable and pretty slaves running freely about the courts,
I doubt if there has been any one. Take her and use her
well. She is a good slave, although somewhat slow and
stupid, and had I not wished to acquire merit at the temple
for my future existence by bringing more life into the world
I should have kept her, for she is good enough for the
kitchen. But I marry my slaves off if any will have them
and the lords do not want them.'

And to the woman she said :

'Obey him and bear him sons and yet more sons. Bring
the first child to me to see.'

'Yes, Ancient Mistress,' said the woman submissively.

They stood hesitating, and Wang Lung was greatly
embarrassed, not knowing whether he should speak or what.

'Well, go, will you!' said the old lady in irritation,
and Wang Lung, bowing hastily, turned and went out, the
woman after him, and after her the gateman, carrying on his
shoulder the box. This box he dropped down in the room
where Wang Lung returned to find his basket and would
carry it no farther, and indeed he disappeared without
another word.



*9



Then Wang Lung turned to the woman and looked at
her for the first time. She had a square, honest face, a
short, broad nose with large black nostrils, and her mouth
was wide, a gash in her face. Her eyes were small and of
a dull black in colour, and were filled with some sadness
that was not clearly expressed. It was a face that seemed
habitually silent and unspeaking* as though it could not
speak if it would. She bore patiently Wang Lung's look,
without embarrassment or response, simply waiting until he
had seen her. He saw that it was true there was not beauty
of any kind in her face — a brown, common, patient face.
But there were no pock-marks on her dark skin, nor was
her lip split. In her ears he saw his rings hanging, the
gold-washed rings he had bought, and on her hands were
the rings he had given her. He turned away with secret
exultation. Well, he had his woman!

'Here is this box and this basket,' he said gruffly.

Without a word she bent over and picking up one end
of the box she placed it upon her shoulder and, staggering
under its weight, tried to rise. He watched her at this and
suddenly he said:

'I will take the box. Here is the basket.'

And he shifted the box to his own back, regardless of
the best robe he wore, and she, still speechless, took the
handle of the basket. He thought of the hundred courts
he had come through and of his figure, absurd under its
burden.

'If there were a side gate ' he muttered, and she

nodded after a little thought, as though she did not under-
stand too quickly what he said. Then she led the way
through a small, unused court that was grown up with
weeds, its pool choked, and there under a bent pine tree
was an old round gate that she pulled loose from its bar,
and they went through and into the street.

Once or twice he looked back at her. She plodded along
steadily on her big feet as though she had walked there
all her life, her wide face expressionless. In the gate of the
wall he stopped uncertainly and fumbled in his girdle with
one hand for the pennies he had left, holding the box
steady on his shoulder with the other hand. He took out



twopence and with these he bought six small green peaches.

'Take these and eat them for yourself,' he said gruffly.
She clutched them greedily, as a child might, and held
them in her hand without speech. When next he looked
at her as they walked along the margin of the wheat-fields
she was nibbling one cautiously, but when she saw him
looking at her she covered it again with her hand and
kept her jaws motionless. .

And thus they went until they reached the western
field where stood the temple to the earth. This temple was '
a small structure, not higher in all than a man's shoulder
and made of grey bricks and roofed with tile. Wang Lung's
grandfather, who had farmed the very fields upon which
Wang Lung now spent his life, had built it, hauling the
bricks from the town upon his wheelbarrow. The walls
were covered with plaster on the outside and a village
artist had been hired in a good year once to paint upon
the white plaster a scene of hills and bamboo. But the rain
of generations had poured upon this painting until now
there was only a faint feathery shadow of bamboos left,
and the hills were almost wholly gone.

Within the temple, snugly under the roof, sat two small,
solemn figures, earthen, for they were formed from the
earth of the fields about the temple. These were the god
himself and his lady. They wore robes of red and gilt
paper, and the god had a scant, drooping moustache of
real hair. Each year at the New Year, Wang Lung's father
bought sheets of red paper and carefully cut and pasted
new robes for the pair. And each year rain and snow beat
in and the sun of summer shone in and spoiled their robes.

At this moment, however, the robes were still new,
since the year was but well begun, and Wang Lung was
proud of their spruce appearance. He took the basket
from the woman's arm and carefully he looked about under
the pork for the sticks of incense he had bought. He was
anxious lest they were broken and thus make an evil
omen; but they were whole, and when he had found them
he stuck them side by side in the ashes of other sticks of
incense that were heaped before the gods, for the whole
neighbourhood worshipped these two small figures. Then



fumbling for his flint and iron he caught, with a dried leaf
for tinder, a flame to light the incense.

Together this man and this woman stood before the
gods of their fields. The woman watched the ends of the
incense redden and turn grey. When the ash grew heavy
she leaned over and with her forefinger she pushed the
head of ash away. Then as though fearful for what she
had done, she looked quickly at Wang Lung, her eyes
dumb. But there was something he liked in her movement.
It was as though she felt that the incense belonged to them
both; it was a moment of marriage. They stood there in
complete silence, side by side, while incense smouldered
into ashes; and then because the sun was sinking, Wang
Lung shouldered the box and they went home.

At the door of the house the old man stood to catch
the last rays of the sun upon him. He made no movement
as Wang Lung, approached with the woman. It would
have been beneath him to notice her. Instead, he feigned
great interest in the clouds and he cried:

'That cloud which hangs upon the left horn of the new
moon speaks of rain. It will not come later than to-morrow
night.' And then as he saw Wang Lung take the basket
from the woman he cried out again, c And have you spent
money?' ^

Wang Lung set the basket on the table. 'There will be
guests to-night,' he said briefly, and he carried the box
into the room where he slept and set it down beside the
box where his own clothes were. He looked at it strangely.
But the old man came to the door and said volubly:

'There is no end to the money spent in this house!'

Secretly he was pleased that his son had invited guests,
jbut he felt it would not do to give, out anything but
^complaints before his new daughter-in-law lest she be set
from the first in ways of extravagance. Wang Lung said
nothing, but he went out and took the basket into the
kitchen, and the woman followed him there. He took the
food piece by piece from the basket and laid it upon the
ledge of the cold stove and he said to her:

'Here is pork and here is beef and fish. There ? re seven
to eat. Can you prepare food?'



He did not look at the woman as he spoke. It would
not have been seemly. The woman answered in her plain
voice :

'I have been kitchen slave since I went into the House
of Hwang. There were meats at every meal.'

Wang Lung nodded and left her, and did not see her
again until the guests came crowding in, his uncle jovial
and sly and hungry, his uncle's son an impudent lad of
fifteen, and the farmers clumsy and grinning with shyness.
Two were men from the village, with whom Wang Lung
exchanged seed and labour at harvest-time, and one was
his next-door neighbour, Ching, a small, quiet man, ever
unwilling to speak unless he were compelled to it. After
they had been seated about the middle room with demurring
and unwillingness to take seats, for politeness, Wang Lung
went into the kitchen to bid the woman serve. Then he
was pleased when she said to him:

'I will hand you the bowls if you will place them upon
the table. I do not like to come out before men.'

Wang Lung felt in him a great pride that this woman
was his and did not fear to appear before him, but would
not before other men. He took the bowls from her hands
at the kitchen door and he set them upon the table in the
middle room and called loudly:

'fiat my uncle and my brothers/ And when the uncle,
who was fond of jokes, said, 'Are we not to see the moth-
browed bride?' Wang Lung replied firmly, 'We are not
yet dfSfe. It is not meet that other men see her until the
marriage is consummated.'

And he urged them to eat, and they ate heartily of the
good fare, heartily and in silence, and this one praised the
brown sauce on the fish and that one the well-done pork,
and Wang Lung said over and over in reply:

'It is poor stuff — it is badly prepared.'

But in his heart he was proud of the dishes, for with
what meats she had the woman had combined sugar and
vinegar and a little wine and soy sauce, and she had skil-
fully brought forth all the force of the meat itself, so that
Wang Lung himself had never tasted such dishes upon the
tables of his friends.



25



That night, after the guests had tarried long over their
tea and had done with their jokes, the woman still lingered
behind the stove, and when Wang Lung had seen the last
guest away he went in and she cowered there in the straw-
piles asleep beside the ox. There was straw in her hair
when he roused her, and when he called her she put up
her arm suddenly in her sleep as though to defend herself
from a blow. When she opened her eyes at last, she looked
at him with her strange, speechless gaze, and he felt as
though he faced a child. He took her by the hand and led
her into the room where that morning he had bathed him-
self for her, and he lit a red candle upon the table. In this
light he was suddenly shy when he found himself alone
with the woman and he was compelled to remind himself :

'There is this woman of mine. The thing is to be done.'

And he began to undress himself doggedly. As for the
woman, she crept around the corner of the curtain and
began without a sound to prepare for the bed. Wang Lung
said gruffly:

'When you lie down, put the light out first.'

Then he lay down and drew the thick quilt about his
shoulders and pretended to sleep. But he was not sleeping.
He lay quivering, every nerve of his flesh awake. And
when, after a long time, the room went dark, and there was
the slow, silent, creeping movement of the woman beside
him, an exultation filled him fit to break his body. He gave
a hoarse laugh into the darkness and seized her.

II

I THERE WAS THIS LUXURY OF LIVING. THE NEXT
morning he lay upon his bed and watched the woman who
was now wholly his own. She rose and drew about her her
loosened garments and fastened them closely about her
throat and waist, fitting them to her body with a slow writhe
and twist. Then she put her feet into her cloth shoes and
drew them on by the straps hanging at the back. The light
from the small hole shone on her in a bar and he saw her
face dimly. It looked unchanged. This was an astonishment



24



to Wang Lung. He felt as though the night must have
changed him; yet here was this woman rising from his
bed as though she had risen every day of her life. The
old man's cough rose querulously out of the dusky dawn
and he said to her:

£ Take to my father first a bowl of hot water for his
lungs.'

She asked,; her voice exactly as it had been yesterday
when she spoke, 'Are there to be tea-leaves in it?'

This simple question troubled Wang Lung. He would
have liked to say, 'Certainly there must be tea-leaves. Do
you think we are beggars?' He would have liked the
woman to think that they made nothing of tea-leaves in
this house. In the House of Hwang, of course, every bowl
of water was green with leaves. There, even a slave, perhaps,
would not drink only water. But he knew his father would
be angry if on the first day the woman served tea to him
instead of water. Besides, they really were not rich. He
replied negligently, therefore:

'Tea? No — no — it makes his cough worse.' ~i

And then he lay in his bed warm and satisfied while
in the kitchen the woman fed the fire and boiled the water.
He would like to have slept, now that he could but his.
foolish body, which he had made to arise every 'morning
so early for all these years, would not sleep although it
could, and so he lay there, tasting and savouring in his
mind and in his flesh his luxury of idleness.

He was still half ashamed to think of this woman of
his. Part of the time he thought of his fields and of the
grains of the wheat and of what his harvest would be if
the rains came and of the white turnip seed he wished to
buy from his neighbour Ching if they could agree upon a
price. But between all these thoughts which were in his
mind every day there ran weaving and interweaving the
new thought of what his life now was, and it occurred to
him, suddenly, thinking of the night, to wonder if she liked
him. This was a new wonder. He had questioned only of
whether he would like her and whether or not she would
be satisfactory in his bed and in his house. Plain though
her face was and rough the skin upon her hands, the flesh



2 5



of her big body was soft and untouched, and he laughed
when he thought of it — the short, hard laugh he had thrown
out into the darkness the night before. The young lords
had not seen, then, beyond that plain face of the kitchen
slave. Her body was beautiful, spare and big-boned, yet
rounded and soft. He desired suddenly that she should
like him as her husband, and then he was ashamed.

The door opened and in her silent way she came in,
bearing in both hands a steaming bowl to him. He sat up
in bed and took it. There were tea-leaves floating upon
the surface of the water. He looked up at her quickly.
She was at once afraid and she said:

'I took no tea to the Old One — I did as you said —
but to you I '

Wang Lung saw that she was afraid of him and he
was pleased, and he answered before she finished, 'I like
it — I like it,' and he drew his tea into his mouth with loud
sups of pleasure.

In himself there was this new exultation that he was
ashamed to make articulate even to his own heart, 'This
woman of mine likes me well enough!'

It seemed to him that during these next months he did
nothing except watch this woman of his. In reality he
worked as he had always worked. He put his hoe upon
his shoulder and he walked to his plots of land and he
cultivated the rows of grain, and he yoked the ox to the
plough and he ploughed the western field for garlic and
onions. But the work was luxury, for when the sun struck
the zenith he could go to his house and food would be
there ready for him to eat, and the dust wiped from the
table, and the bowls and the chopsticks placed neatly upon
it. Hitherto he had had to prepare the meals when he
came in, tired though he was, unless the old man grew
hungry out of time and stirred up a little meal or baked
a piece of flat, unleavened bread to roll about a stem of
garlic.

Now whatever there was, was ready for him, and he
could seat himself upon the bench by the table and eat at
once. The earthen floor was swept and the fuel pile re-

26



plenished. The woman, when he had gone in the morning
took the bamboo rake and a length of rope and with these
she roamed the country-side, reaping here a bit of grass
and there a twig or a handful of leaves, returning at noon
with enough to cook the dinner. It pleased the man that
they need buy no more fueL

In the afternoon she took a hoe and a basket and with
these upon her shoulder she went to the main road leading
into the city where mutes and donkeys and horses carried
burdens to and fro, and there she picked the droppings
from the animals and carried it home and jailed the manure
in the dooryard for fertiliser for the fields. These things
she did without a word and without being commanded to
do them. And when the end of the day came she did not
rest herself until the ox had been fed in the kitchen and
until she had dipped water to hold to its muzzle to let it
drink what it would.

And she took their ragged clothes and, with thread
that she herself spun on a bamboo spindle from a wad of
cotton, she mended and contrived to cover the rents in
their winter clothes. Their bedding she took into the sun
on the threshold and ripped the coverings from the quilts
and washed them and hung them upon a bamboo to dry,
and the cotton in the quilts that had grown hard and grey
from years she picked over, killing the vermin that had
flourished in the hidden folds, and sunning it all. Day
after day she did one thing after another, until the three
rooms seemed clean and almost prosperous. The old man's
cough grew better and he sat in the sun by the southern
wall of the house, always half-asleep and warm and content.

But she never talked, this woman, except for the brief
necessities of life. Wang Lung, watching her move steadily
and slowly about the rooms on her big feet, watching
secretly the stolid, square face, the unexpressed, half-fearful
look of her eyes, made nothing of her. At night he knew
the soft firmness of her body. But in the day her clothes,
her plain blue cotton coat and trousers, covered all that he
knew, and she was like a faithful, speechless serving-maid,
who is only a serving-maid and nothing more. And it
was not meet that he should say to her, 'Why do you not



2 7



speak?' It should be enough that she fulfilled her duty.

Sometimes, working over the clods in the fields, he
would fall to pondering about her. What had she seen in
those hundred courts? What had been her life, that life
she never shared with him? He could make nothing of it.
And then he was ashamed of his own curiosity and of his
linterest in her. She was, after all, only a woman.

But there is not that about three rooms and two meals
a day to keep busy a woman who has been a slave in a
great house and who has worked from dawn until midnight.
One day when Wang Lung was hard pressed with the
swelling wheat and was cultivating it with his hoe, day
after day, until his back throbbed with weariness, her
shadow fell across the furrow over which he bent himself,
and there she stood, with a hoe across her shoulder.

'There is nothing in the house until nightfall,' she said
briefly, and without speech she took the furrow to the left
of him and fell into steady hoeing^.

The sun beat down upon them, for it was early summer,
and her face was soon dripping with her sweat. Wang
Lung had his coat off and his back bare, but she worked
with her thin garment covering her shoulders and it grew
wet and clung to her like skin. Moving together in a
perfect rhythm, without a word, hour after hour, he fell
into a union with her which took the pain from his labour.
He had no articulate thought of anything; there was only
this perfect sympathy of movement, of turning this earth of
theirs over and over to the sun, this earth which formed
their home and fed their bodies and made their gods. The
earth lay rich and dark, and fell apart lightly under the
points of their hoes. Sometimes they turned up a bit of
brick, a splinter of wood. It was nothing. Some time, in
some age, bodies of men and women had been buried
there, houses had stood there, had fallen, and gone back
into the earth. So would also their house sometime return
into the earth, their bodies also. Each had his turn at this
earth. They worked on, moving together — together pro-
ducing the fruit of this earth — speechless in their movement
together.

28



When the sun had set he straightened his back slowly
and looked at the woman. Her face was wet and streaked
with the earth. She was as brown as the very soil itself.
Her wet, dark garments clung to her square body. She
smoothed a last furrow slowly. Then in her usual plain
way she said, straight out, her voice flat and more than
usually plain in the silent evening air:

'I am with child.'

Wang Lung stood still. What was there to say to this
thing, then ! She stooped to pick up a bit of broken brick
and threw it out of the furrow. It was as though she had
said, 'I have brought you tea,' or as though she had said,
£ We can eat.' It seemed as ordinary as that to her! But
to him — he could not say what it was to him. His heart
swelled and stopped as though it met sudden confines.
Well, it was their turn at this earth!

He took the hoe suddenly from her hand and he said,
his voice thick in his throat, 'Let be for now. It is a day's
end. We will tell the old man.'

They walked home then, she half a dozen paces behind
him, as befitted a woman. The old man stood at the door,
hungry for his evening's food, which, now that the woman
was in the house, he would never prepare for himself. He
was impatient and he called out:

'I am too old to wait for my food like this!'

But Wang Lung, passing him into the room, said:

'She is with child already.'

He tried to say it easily as one might say, 'I have planted
the seeds in the western field to-day,' but he could not.
Although he spoke in a low voice it was to him as though
he had shouted the words out louder than he would.

The old man blinked for a moment and then com-
prehended, and cackled with laughter.

'Heh-heh-heh,' he called out to his daughter-in-law as
she came, 'so the harvest is in sight!'

Her face he could not see in the dusk, but she answered
evenly :

'I shall prepare food now.'

'Yes — yes — food,' said the old man eagerly, following
her into the kitchen like a child. Just as the thought of a



29



grandson had made him forget his meal, so now the
thought of food freshly before him made him forget the
child.

But Wang Lung sat upon a bench by the table in the
darkness and put his head upon his folded arms. Out of
this body of his, out of his own loins, life!

Ill

WHEN THE HOUR FOR BIRTH DREW NEAR HE SAID
to the woman:

"We must have Some one to help at the time — some
woman.'

But she shook her head. She was clearing away the
bowls after the evening food. The old man had gone to
his bed, and the two of them were alone in the night, with
only the light that fell upon them from the flickering flame
of a small tin lamp filled with bean-oil, in which a twist of
cotton floated for a wick.

( 'No woman?' he asked in consternation. He was be-
ginning now to be accustomed to these conversations with
j her in which her part was little more than a movement of

I head or hand, or at most an occasional word dropped un-
willingly from her wide mouth. He had even come to feel
no lack in such conversing. 'But it will be odd with only
jtwo men in the house!' he continued. 'My mother had a
woman from the village. I know nothing of these affairs.
Is there none in the great house — no old slave with whom
r you were friends — who could come?'

It was the first time he had mentioned the house from
which she came. She turned on him . as he had never seen
her, her narrow eyes widened, her face stirred with dull
anger.

'None in that house!' she cried out at him.

He dropped his pipe, which he was filling, and stared
at her. But her face was suddenly as usual and she was
collecting the chopsticks as though she had not spoken.

'Well, here is a thing!' he said in astonishment. But
she said nothing. Then he continued in argument, 'We



3°



two men, we have no ability in childbirth. For my father
it is not fitting to enter your room — for myself, I have
never even seen a cow give birth. My clumsy hands might
mar the child. Some one from the great house, now, where
the slaves are always giving birth '

She had placed the chopsticks carefully down in an
orderly heap upon the table and she looked at him and
after a moment's looking she said: -

'When I return to that house it will be with my son in
my arms. I shall have a red coat on him and red-flowered
trousers and on his head a hat with a small gilded Buddha
sewn on the front and on his feet tiger-faced shoes. And
I will wear new shoes and a new coat of black sateen, and
I will go into the kitchen where I spent my days, and I
will go into the great hall where the Old One sits with her
opium, and I will show myself and my son to all of them/

He had never heard so many words from her before.
They came forth steadily and without fcreak, albeit slowly,
and he realised that she had planned this whole thing out
for herself. When she had been working in the fields be-
side him she had been planning all this out! How astonish-
ing she was! He would have said that she had scarcely
thought of the child, so quietly had she gone about her
work, day in and day out. And instead she saw this child,
born and fully clothed, and herself as his mother, in a new
coat! He was for once without words himself, and he
pressed the tobacco diligently into a ball between his thumb
and forefinger, and picking up his pipe he fitted the tobacco
into the bowl.

'I suppose you will need some money,' he said at last
with apparent gruffhess.

'If you will give me three silver pieces — ' she said
fearfully. 'It is a great deal, but I have counted carefully
and I will waste no penny of it. I shall make the cloth-
dealer give me the last inch to the foot.'

Wang Lung fumbled in his girdle. The day before he
had sold a load and a half of reeds from the pond in the
western field to the town market and he had in his girdle
a little more than she wished. He put the three silver
dollars upon the table. Then, after a little hesitation, he



3*



added a fourth piece which he had long kept by him on
the chance of his wanting to gamble a little some morning
at the tea-house. But he never did more than linger about
the tables and look at the dice as they clattered upon the
table, fearful lest he lose if he played. He usually ended
by spending his spare hours in the town at the storyteller's
booth, where one may listen to an old tale and pay no
more than a penny into his bowl when it was passed about.

'You had better take the other piece,' he said, lighting
his pipe between the words, blowing quickly at the paper
spill to set it aflame. 'You may as well make his coat of
a small remnant of silk. After all, he is the first.'

She did not at once take the money, but she stood
looking at it, her face motionless. Then she said in a half-
whisper:

'It is the first time I have had silver money in my hand.'
Suddenly she took it and clenched it in her hand and
hurried into the bedroom.

V Wang Lung sat smoking, thinking of the silver as it
had lain upon the table. It had come out of the earth, this
silver — out of his earth that he ploughed and turned and
spent himself upon. He took his life from this earth; drop
by drop by his sweat he wrung food from it, and from the
food silver. Each time before this that he had taken the
silver out to give to any one, it had been like taking a
piece of his life and giving it to some one carelessly. But
now for the first time such giving was not pain. He saw,
not the silver in the alien hand of a merchant in the town;
he saw the silver transmuted into something worth even
more than itself— clothes upon the body of his son. And
this strange woman of his, who worked about, saying no-
thing, seeming to see nothing, she had first seen the child

Ijthus clothed !

J

She would have no one with her when the hour came.
/ It came one night, early, when the sun was scarcely set.
She was working beside him in the harvest field. The
wheat had borne and been cut and the field flooded and
the young rice set, and now the rice bore harvest, and the
ears were ripe and full after the summer rains and the!

3*



\



warm ripening sun of early autumn. Together they cut the
sheaves all day, bending and cutting with short-handled
scythes. She had stooped stiffly, because of the burden she
bore, and she moved more slowly than he, so that they cut
unevenly, his row ahead and hers behind, She began to
cut more and more slowly as noon wore on to afternoon
and evening, and he turned to look at her with impatience.
She stopped and stood up then, her scythe dropped. On
her face was a new sweat, the sweat of a new agony.

£ It is come,' she said. 'I will go into the house. Do not i
come into the room until I call. Only bring me a newly j
peeled reed, and slit it, that I may cut the child's life I \
from mine.'

She went across the fields towards the house as though
there were nothing to come, and after he had watched her
he went to the edge of the pond in the outer field and
chose a slim green reed and peeled it carefully and slit it
on the edge of his scythe. The quick autumn darkness
was falling then and he shouldered his scythe and went
home. — l

When he reached the house he found his supper hot on j
the table and the old man eating. She has stopped in her I
labour to prepare them food! He said to himself that she
was a woman such as is not commonly found. Then he
went to the door of their room and he called out : |

'Here is the reed!'

He waited, expecting that she would call out to him to
bring it in to her. But she did not. She came to the door
and through the crack her hand reached out and took the
reed. She said no word, but he heard her panting as an
animal pants which has run for a long way.

The old man looked up from his bowl to say:
'Eat, or all will be cold.' And then he said. £ Do not 4
trouble yourself yet — it will be a long time. I remember
well when the first was born to me it was dawn before it
was over. Ah, me, to think that out of all the children I
begot and your mother bore, one after the other — a score i
or so — I forget — only you have lived! You see why a
woman must bear and bear.' And then he said again, as J
though he had just thought of it newly, 'By this time to-



5056, 3.



33



morrow I may be grandfather to a man child!' He began
to laugh suddenly and he stopped his eating and sat
chuckling for a long time in the dusk of the room.

But Wang Lung stood listening at the door to those
heavy animal pants. A smell of hot blood came through
the crack, a sickening smell that frightened him. The
panting of the woman within became quick and loud, like
whispered screams, but she made no sound aloud. When
he could bear no more and was about to break into the
room, a thin, fierce cry came out and he forgot everything.

'Is it a man?' he cried importunately, forgetting the
woman. The thin cry burst out again, wiry, insistent. 'Is
it a man?' he cried again, 'tell me at least this — is it a
man?'

And the voice of the woman answered as faintly as an
echo, 'A man!'

He went and sat down at the table then. How quick
it had all been! The food was long cold and the old man
was asleep on his bench, but how quick it had all been!
He shook the old man's shoulder.

'It is a man child!' he called triumphantly. 'You are
grandfather and I am father!'

The old man woke suddenly and began to laugh as he
had been laughing when he fell asleep.

'Yes — yes — of course,' he cackled, 'a grandfather — a
grandfather.' And he rose and went to his bed, still
laughing.

Wang Lung took up the bowl of cold rice and began
to eat. He was very hungry all at once and he could not
get the food into his mouth quickly enough. In the room
he could hear the woman dragging herself about and the
cry of the child was incessant and piercing.

'I suppose we shall have no more peace in this house
now,' he said to himself proudly.

When he had eaten all that he wished he went to the
door again and she called to him to come in and he went
in. The odour of spilt blood still hung hot upon the air,
but there was no trace of it except in the wooden tub.
But into this she had poured water and had pushed it
under the bed so that he could hardly see it. The red



34



candle was lit and she was lying neatly covered upon the .
bed. Beside her, wrapped in a pair of his old trousers, as
the custom was in this part, lay his son. I

He went up and for the moment there were no words
in his mouth. His heart crowded up into his breast and
he leaned over the child to look at it. It had a round,
wrinkled face that looked very dark, and upon its head
the hair was long and damp and black. It had ceased crying
and lay with its eyes tightly shut.

He looked at his wife and she looked back at him.
Her hair was still wet with her agony and her narrow eyes
were sunken. Beyond this she was as she always was.
But to him she was touching, lying there. His heart rushed
out to these two, and he said, not knowing what else there
was that could be said:

'To-morrow I will go into the city and buy a pound
of red sugar and stir it into boiling water for you to drink.'

And then, looking at the child again, this burst forth
from him suddenly as though he had just thought of it,
5We shall have to buy a good basketful of eggs and dye
them all red for the village. Thus will every one know I
have a son!'

IV

THE NEXT DAY AFTER THE CHILD WAS BORN THE
woman rose as usual and prepared food for them, but
she did not go into the harvest fields with Wang Lung,
and so he worked alone until after the noon hour. Then he
dressed himself in his blue gown and went into the town.
He wentjo_the_market and bought fifty eggs, not new laid,
but still well enough and costing a penny for one, and he
bought red paper to boil in the water with them to make
them red. Then with the eggs in his basket he went to the
sweet shop, and there he bought a pound and a little more
of red sugar and saw it wrapped carefully into its brown
paper, and under the straw string which held it the sugar-
dealer slipped a strip of red paper, smiling as he did so.

Tt is for the mother of a new-born child, perhaps?'

C A first-born son,' said Wang Lung proudly.

35



'Ah, good fortune/ answered the man carelessly, his
eye on a well-dressed customer who had just come in.

This he had said many times to others, even every day
to some one, but to Wang Lung it seemed special and
he was pleased with the man's courtesy and he bowed,
and bowed again as he went from the shop. It seemed to
him as he walked into the sharp sunshine of the dusty
j street that there was never a man so filled with good for-
Uune as he.

j He thought of this at first with joy and then with a
pang of fear. It did not do in this life to be too fortunate.
The air and the earth were filled with malignant spirits
who could not endure the happiness of mortals, especially
of such as are poor. He turned abruptly into the candle-
maker's shop, who sold incense also, and there he bought
four sticks of incense, one for each person in his house,
and with these four sticks he went into the small temple
of the gods of the earth, and he thrust them into the cold
ashes of the incense he had placed there before, he and
his wife together. He watched the four sticks well lit and
then went homeward, comforted. These two small, pro-
tective figures, sitting staidly under their small roof — what
a power they had!

And then, almost before one could realise anything,
the woman was back in the fields beside him. The harvests
were past, and the grain they beat out upon the threshing-
floor which was also the dooryard to the house. They beat
it out with flails, he and the woman together. And when
the grain was flailed they winnowed it, casting it up from
great flat bamboo baskets into the wind and catching the
good grain as it fell, and the chaff blew away in a cloud
with the wind. Then there were the fields to plant for
winter wheat again, and when he had yoked the ox and
ploughed the land the woman followed behind with her
hoe and broke the clods in the furrows.

She worked all day now and the child lay on an old
torn quilt on the ground, asleep. When it cried the woman
stopped and uncovered her bosom to the child's mouth,
sitting flat upon the ground, and the sun beat down upon

36



them both, the reluctant sun of late autumn that will no
let go the warmth of summer until the cold of the coming
winter forces it. The woman and the child were as brown
as the soil and they sat there like figures made of earth
There was the dust of the fields upon the woman's hair
and upon the child's soft black head.

But out of the woman's great brown breast the milk
gushed forth for the child, milk as white as snow, and
when the child suckled at one breast it flowed like a foun-
tain from the other, and she let it flow. There was more
than enough for the child, greedy though he was, life
enough for many children, and she let it flow out care-
lessly, conscious of her abundance. There was always more
and more. Sometimes she lifted her breast and let it flow
out upon the ground to save her clothing, and it sank into
the earth and made a soft, dark, rich spot in the field.
The child was fat and good-natured and ate of the inex-
haustible life his mother gave him.

Winter came on and they were prepared against it.
There had been such harvests as never were before, and
the small, three-roomed house was bursting. From the
rafters of the thatched roof hung strings and strings of
dried onions and garlic, and about the middle room and
in the old man's room and in their own room were mats
made of reeds and twisted into the shapes of great jars
and these were filled full of wheat and rice. Much of this
would be sold, but Wang Lung was frugal and he did not,
like many of the villagers, spend his money freely at
gambling or on foods too delicate for them, and so, like
them, have to sell the grain at harvest when the price was
low. Instead he saved it and sold it when the snow came
on the ground or at the New Year when people in the
towns will pay well for food at any price.

His uncle was always having to sell his grain before it
was even well ripened. Sometimes, to get a little ready
cash, he even sold it standing in the field to save himself
the trouble of harvesting and threshing. But then his uncle's
wife was a , foolish woman, fat and lazy, and for ever v
clamouring for sweet food, and for food of this sort and
that, and for new shoes bought in the town. Wang Lung's



37



woman made all the shoes for himself and for the old
man and for her own feet and the child's. He would not
know what to make of it if she wished to buy shoes!

There was never anything hanging from the rafters in
his uncle's crumbling old house. But in his own there
was even a leg of pork wich he had bought from his
neighbour, Ching, when he killed his pig that looked as
though it were sickening for a disease. The pig had been
caught early before it lost flesh and the leg was a large
one and O-lan had salted it thoroughly and hung it to dry.
There were, as well, two of their own chickens killed and
drawn and dried with the feathers on and stuffed with
salt inside.

In the midst of all this plenty they sat in the house,
therefore, when the winds of winter came out of the desert
to the north-east of them — winds bitter and biting. Soon
the child could almost sit alone. They had had a feast of
noodles, which mean long life, on his month birthday, when
he was a full moon of age, and Wang Lung had invited
those who came to his wedding-feast, and to each he had
given a round ten of the red eggs he had boiled and dyed,
and to all these who came from the village to congratulate
him he gave two eggs. And every one envied him his son,
a great, fat, moony-faced child with high cheek-bones like
his mother. Now as winter came on he sat on the quilt
placed on the earthen floor of the house instead of upon
the fields, and they opened the door to the south for light,
and the sun came in, and the wind on the north beat in
vain against the thick earthen wall of the house.

The leaves were soon torn from the date tree on the
threshold and from the willow trees and the peach trees
near the fields. Only the bamboo leaves clung to the bam-
boos in the sparse clump to the east of the house, and even
though the wind wrenched the stems double, the leaves
clung.

With this dry wind the wheat seed that lay in the ground
could not sprout, and Wang Lung waited anxiously for
the rains. And then the rains came suddenly out of a still
grey day when the wind fell and the air was quiet and
warm, and they all sat in the house filled with well-being,

38



watching the rain fall full and straight and sink into the
fields about the dooryard and drip from the thatched ends
of the roof above the door. The child was amazed and
stretched out his hands to catch the silver lines of the rain
as it fell, and he laughed and they laughed with him and
the old man squatted on the floor beside the child and said :
'There is not another child like this in a dozen villages.
Those brats of my brother notice nothing before they
walk.'

And in the fields the wheat seed sprouted and pushed
spears of delicate green above the wet brown earth.

At a time like this there was visiting, because each farm-
er felt that for once heaven was doing the work in the
fields and their crops were being watered without their
backs being broken for it, carrying buckets to and fro,
slung upon a polo across their shoulders; and in the morn-
ing they gathered at this house and that, drinking tea
here and there, going from house to house barefoot, across
the narrow path between the fields under great oiled-paper
umbrellas. The women stayed at home and made shoes
and mended clothes, if they were thrifty, and thought of
preparations for the feast of the New Year.

But Wang Lung and his wife were not frequent at visit-
ing. There was no house in the village of small scattered
houses, of which theirs was one of a half dozen, which was
so filled with warmth and plenty as their own, and Wang
Lung felt that if he became too intimate with the others
there would be borrowing. New Year was coming and who
had all the money he wanted fofTKeTiew clothes and the
feasting? He stayed in his house, and while the woman
mended and sewed he took his rakes of split bamboo and
examined them, and where the string was broken he wove
in new string made of hemp he grew himself, and where
a prong was broken out he drove in cleverly a new bit of
bamboo.

And what he did for the farm implements, his wife,
O-lan, did for the house implements. If an earthen jar leak-
ed she did not, like other women, cast it aside and talk of
a new one. Instead she mixed earth and clay and welded
the crack and heated it slowly and it was as good as new.

39'



They sat in their house, therefore, and they rejoiced in
each other's approval, although their speech was never
anything more than scattered words such as these:

'Did you save the seed from the large squash for the
new planting?' Or, 'We will sell the wheat straw and
burn the bean-stalks in the kitchen.' Or perhaps rarely
Wang Lung would say, 'This is a good dish of noodles,'
and O-lan would answer in deprecation, 'It is good flour
we have this year from the fields.'

From the produce, Wang Lung in this good year had
a handful of silver dollars over and above what they needed,
and these he was fearful of keeping in his belt or of telling
any except the woman what he had. They plotted where
to keep the silver and at last the woman cleverly dug a
small hole in the inner wall of their room behind the bed
and into this Wang Lung thrust the silver and with a clod
of earth she covered the hole, and it was as though there
was nothing there. But to both Wang and O-lan it gave a
sense of secret richness and reserve. Wang Lung was con-
scious that he had money more than he need spend, and
when he walked among his fellows he walked at ease with
himself and with all.

V

THE NEW YEAR APPROACHED AND IN EVERY HOUSE
in the village there were preparations. Wang Lung went
into the town to the candlemaker's shop and he bought*
squares of red paper on which were brushed in gilt ink the
letter for happiness and some with the letter for riches, and
these squares he pasted upon his farm utensils to bring him
luck in the New Year. Upon his plough and upon the ox's
yoke and upon the two buckets in which he carried his J
fertiliser and his water, upon each of these he pasted a
square. And then upon the doors of his house he pasted
long strips of red paper brushed with mottoes of good luck,
and over his doorway he pasted a fringe of red paper cun- j
ningly cut into a flower pattern, and very finely cut. And
he bought red paper to make new dresses for the gods,
and this the old man did cleverly enough for his old shak-jl



40



ing hands, and Wang Lung took them and put them upon
the two small gods in the temple to the earth and he burn-
ed a little incense before them for the sake of the New
Year. And for his house he bought also two red candles
to burn on the eve of the year upon the table under the
picture of a god, which was pasted on the wall of the middle
room above where the table stood.

And Wang Lung went again into the town and he bought
pork fat and white sugar, and the woman rendered the
fat smooth and white and she took rice flour, which they
had ground from their own rice between their millstones
to which they could yoke the ox when they needed to,
and she took the fat and the sugar and she mixed and
kneaded rich New Year's cakes, called moon cakes, such
as were eaten in the House of Hwang.

When the cakes were laid out upon the table in strips,
ready for heating, Wang Lung felt his heart fit to burst
with pride. There was no other woman in the village able
to do what his had done — to make cakes such as only the
rich ate at the feast. In some of the cakes she had put strips
of little red haws and spots of dried green plums, making
flowers and patterns.

'It is a pity to eat these,' said Wang Lung.

The old man was hovering about the table, pleased as
a child might be pleased with the bright colours. He said:

"Call my brother, your uncle, and his children — let them
see!'

But prosperity had made Wang Lung cautious. One
could not ask hungry people only to see cakes.

'It is ill luck to look at cakes before the New Year,'
he replied hastily. And the woman, her hands all dusty
with the fine rich flour and sticky with the fat, said :

'Those are not for us to eat, beyond one or two of the
plain ones for guests to taste. We are not rich enough to]
eat white sugar and lard. I am preparing them for the Old.
Mistress at the great house. I shall take the child on the i
second day of the New Year and carry the cakes for a gift.'

Then the cakes were more important than ever, and
Wang Lung was pleased that to the great hall where he
had stood with so much timidity and in such poverty his

4i



wife should now go as visitor, carrying his son, dressed in
red, and cakes made as these were with the best flour and
sugar and lard.

All else at that New Year sank into insignificance beside
this visit. His new coat of black cotton cloth, which O-lan
had made, when he had put it on only made him say so
himself :

C I shall wear it when I take them to the gate of the great
house.'

He even bore carelessly the first day of the New Year
when his uncle and his neighbours came crowding into the
house to wish his father and himself well, all boisterous
with food and drink. He had himself seen to it that the
coloured cakes were put away into the basket lest he might
have to offer them to common men, although he found it
very hard when the plain white ones were praised for their
flavour of fat and sugar not to cry out:

'You should see the coloured ones!'

But he did not, for more than anything he wished to
enter the great house with pride.

Then on the second day of the New Year, when it is
the day for women to visit each other, the men having
eaten and drunk well the day before, they rose at dawn
and the woman dressed the child, in his red coat and in
the tiger-faced shoes she had made, and she put on his
head, freshly shaven by Wang Lung himself on the last day
of the old year, the crownless red hat with the small gilt
Buddha sewed in front, and she set him upon the bed. Then
Wang Lung dressed himself quickly while his wife combed
out afresh her long black hair and knotted it with the brass
pin washed with silver which he had bought for her, and
she put on her new coat of black that was made from the
same piece as his own new robe, twenty-four feet of good
cloth for the two, and two feet of cloth thrown in for good
measure, as the custom is at cloth-shops. Then, he carrying
the child and she the cakes in the basket, they set out on
the path across the fields, now barren with winter.

Then Wang Lung had his reward at the great gate of
the House of Hwang, for when the gateman came to the

42



woman's call he opened his eyes at all he saw and he twirl-
ed the three long hairs on his mole and cried out :

'Ah, Wang the farmer, three this time instead of one!'
And then seeing the new clothes they all wore and the
child who was a son, he said further, 'One has no need to
wish you more fortune this year than you have had in the
last.'

Wang Lung answered negligently, as one speaks to a
man who is scarcely an equal, 'Good harvests — good har-
vests ' and he stepped with assurance inside the gate.

The gateman was impressed with all he saw and he said
to Wang Lung:

'Do you sit within my wretched room while I announce
your woman and son within.'

And Wang Lung stood watching them go across the
court, his wife and his son, bearing gifts to the head of a
great house. It was all to his honour, and when they had
dwindled down the long vista of the courts one inside the
other, and had turned at last wholly out of sight, he went
into the gateman's house and there he accepted as a matter
of course from the gateman's pock-marked wife the honour-
able seat to the left of the table in the middle room, and he
accepted with only a slight nod the bowl of tea which she
presented to him and he set it before him and did not drink
of it, as though it were not good enough in quailty of tea-
leaves for him.

It seemed a long time before the gateman returned, bring-
ing back again the woman and child. Wang Lung looked
closely at the woman's face for an instant trying to see if
all were well, for he had learned now from that impassive
square countenance to detect small changes at first invis-
ible to him. She wore a look of heavy content, however,
and at once he became impatient to hear her tell of what
had happened in those courts of the ladies into which he
could not go, now that he had business there.

With short bows, therefore, to the gateman and to his
pock-marked wife he hurried O-lan away, and he took into
his own arms the child who was asleep and lying all crum-
pled in his new coat.

'Well?' he called back to her over his shoulder as she



4 3



followed him. For once he was impatient with her slowness.
She drew a little nearer to him and said in a whisper :

'I believe, if one should ask me, that they are feeling a
pinch this year in that house/

She spoke in a shocked tone as one might speak of gods
being hungry.

' What do you mean?' said Wang Lung, urging her.

But she would not be hastened. Words were to her things
to be caught one by one and released with difficulty.

'The Ancient Mistress wore the same coat this year as
last. I have never seen this happen before. And the slaves
had no new coats.' And then after a pause she said, 'I saw
not one slave with a new coat like mine.' And then after a
while she said again, 'As for our son, there was not even
a child among the concubines of the Old Master himself
to compare to him in beauty and in dress.'

A slow smile spread over her face and Wang Lung laugh-
ed aloud and held the child tenderly against him. How
well he had done — how well he had done ! And then as he
exulted he was smitten with fear. What foolish thing was
he doing, walking like this under an open sky, with a beau-
tiful man child for any evil spirit passing by chance through
the air to see! He opened his coat hastily and thrust the
child's head into his bosom and he said in a loud voice :

'What a pity our child is a female whom no one could
want, and covered with smallpox as well! Let us pray it
may die.'

'Yes — yes,' said his wife as quickly as she could, under-
standing dimly what a thing they had done.

And being comforted with these precautions, Wang
Lung once more urged his wife :

'Did you find out why they are poorer?'

'I had but a moment for private talk with the cook under
whom I worked before,' she replied, 'but she said, "This
house cannot stand for ever with all the young lords, five
of them, spending money like waste water in foreign parts
and sending home woman after woman as they weary of
them, and the Old Lord living at home adding a concu-
bine or two each year, and the Old Mistress eating enough
opium every day to fill two shoes with gold." '



44



'Do they indeed?' murmured Wang Lung, spell-bound.

'Then the third daughter is to be*married in the spring/
continued O-lan, 'and her dowry is a prince's ransom and
enough to buy an official seat in a big city. Her clothes
she will have of nothing but the finest satins, with spe-
cial patterns woven in Soochow and Hangchow, and she
will have a tailor sent from Shanghai with his retinue of
under-tailors lest she find her clothes less fashionable than
those of the women in foreign parts.'

'Whom will she marry, then, with all this expense?' said
Wang Lung, struck with admiration and horror at such
pouring out of wealth.

'She is to marry the second son of a Shanghai magis-
trate,' said the woman, and then after a long pause she added,
'They must be getting poorer, for the Old Mistress herself
told me they wished to sell land, some of the land to the
south of the house, just outside the city wall, where they
have always planted rice each year because it is good land
and easily flooded from the moat around the wall.'

'Sell their land!' repeated Wang Lung, convinced. 'Then
indeed are they growing poor. Land is one's flesh and
blood.'

He pondered for a while and suddenly a thought came
to him and he smote the side of his head with his palm.

'What have I not thought of!' he cried, turning to *he
woman. 'We will buy the land!

They stared at each other, he in delight, she in stupefac-
tion.

'But the land — the land ' she stammered.

'I will buy it!' he cried in a lordly voice. 'I will buy it
from the great House of Hwang!'

'It is too far away,' she said in consternation. 'We would
have to walk half the morning to reach it.'

1 will buy it,' he repeated peevishly as he might repeat
a demand to his mother who crossed him.

'It is a good thing to buy land,' she said pacifically. 'It
is better certainly than putting money into a mud wall.
But why not a piece of your uncle's land? He is clamour-
ing to sell that strip near to the western field we now have.'

'That land of my uncle's,' said Wang Lung loudly, 'I



45



would not have it. He has been dragging a crop out of it
in this way and that for twenty years, and not a bit has
he put back of manure or bean-cake. The soil is like lime.
No, I will buy Hwang's land.'

He said 'Hwang's land' as casually as he might have
said 'Ching's land' — Ching, who was his farmer neigh-
bour. He would be more than equal to these people in the
foolish, great, wasteful house. He would go with the silver
in his hand and he would say plainly:

'I have money. What is the price of the earth you wish
to sell?' Before the Old Lord he heard himself saying and
to the Old Lord's agent, 'Count me as any one else. What
is the fair price? I have it in my hand.'

And his wife, who had been a slave in the kitchens of
that proud family, she would be wife to a man who owned
a piece of the land that for generations had made the House
of Hwang great. It was as though she felt his thought for
she suddenly ceased her resistance and she said:

'Let it be bought. After all, rice land is good, and it is
near the moat and we can get water every year. It is sure.'

And again the slow smile spread over her face, the smile
that never lightened the dullness of her narrow black
eyes, and after a long' time she said:

'Last year this time I was slave in that house.'

And they walked on, silent with the fullness of this
thought.

VI

THIS PIECE OF LAND WHICH WANG LUNG NOW OWNED
was a thing which greatly changed his life. At first, after
he had dug the silver from the wall and taken it to the
great house, after the honour of speaking as an equal
to the Old Lord's equal was past he was visited with a de-
pression of spirit which was almost regret. When he thought
of the hole in the wall now empty that had been filled with
silver he need not use, he wished that he had his silver
back. After all, this land, it would take hours of labour
again, and as O-lan said, it was far away, more than a til

4 6



which is a third of a mile. And again, the buying of it had
not been quite so filled with glory as he had anticipated. He
had gone too early to the great house and the Old Lord
was still sleeping. True, it was noon, but when he said in
a loud voice:

'Tell his Old Honour I have important business-tell
tiZy 0 ^ 7 15 COnCerned!, the § ateman had answered posi-

'All the money in the world would not tempt me to
wake the old tiger He sleeps with his new concubine,

1 each Blossom, whom he has had but three days It is
not worth my life to waken him.' And then he added some-
what maliciously, pulling at the hairs on his mole, 'And
do not think that silver will waken him-he has had silver
under his hand since he was born.'

In the end, it had had to be managed with the Old Lord's
agent, an oily scoundrel whose hands were heavy with the
Z^V w/ StUCk r t0 thC f in paSsin S- So i{ seei " e d some-

2 K °7" 18 u L ! Mg J that after a11 the silver was more
valuable than the land. One could see silver shining.

Well, but the land was his! He set out one grey day in
the second month of the new year to look at it None
knew yet that it belonged to him, and he walked out to
see it alone a long square of heavy black clay that lay stretch-
l f S. enc »cling the wall of the town. He

paced the land off carefully, three hundred paces lengthwise
and a hundred and twenty across. Four stones still marked
the corners of the boundaries, stones set with the great seal
STT °f *e House of Hwang. Well, he would have

would n?fv HC W ° Uld PUH U P the St ° nes Iater a *d he
I jfl rT there-not yet, for he was not
ready for people to know that he was rich enough to buy

SSfiJr. Ff Zt h ° USe ' but later > when he was more
rich so that it did not matter what he did. And looking at
that long square of land he thought to himself:

ful nf 3? *t gfeat h ° USe " means nothin g' *is hand-
ful of earth, but to me it means much!'

Then he had a turn of his mind and he was filled with a
-ontempt for himself that a small piece of land should seem
>o important. Why, when he had poured out his silver



47



proudly before the agent the man had scraped it up care-
lessly in his hands and said :

'Here is enough for a few days of opium for the old lady,
at any rate.'

And the wide difference that still lay between him and
the great house seemed suddenly impassable as the moatful
of water in front of him, and as high as the wall beyond,
stretching up straight and hoary before him. He was filled
with an angry determination then, and he said to his heart
that he would fill that hole with silver again and again
until he had bought from the House of Hwang so much
land that his own would be less than an inch in his sight.

And so this parcel of land became to Wang Lung a sign
and a symbol.

r Spring came with blustering winds and torn clouds of
rain, and for Wang Lung, the half-idle days of winter were
plunged into long days of desperate labour over his land.
The old man looked after the child now and the woman
i worked with the man from dawn until sunset flowed over
the fields, and when Wang Lung perceived one day that
' again she was with child, his first thought was of irritation
that during the harvest she would be unable to work. He
shouted at her, irritable with fatigue:

'So you have chosen this time to breed again, have you!'

She answered stoutly:
/ 'This time it is nothing. It is only the first that is hard.'
/ Beyond this nothing was said of the second child from
the time he noticed its growth swelling her body until the
day came in autumn when she laid down her hoe one morn-
ing and crept into the house. He did not go back that day
even for his noon meal, for the sky was heavy with thun-
derclouds and his rice lay dead ripe for gathering into
sheaves. Later, before the sun set, she was back beside him,
her body flattened, spent, but her face silent and undaunted.
His impulse was to say:

Tor this day you have had enough. Go and lie upon
your bed.' But the aching of his own exhausted body made
him cruel, and he said to himself that he had suffered as
much with his labour that day as she with her childbirth,
and so he only asked between the strokes of his scythe:

48 1



'Is it male or female?'
She answered calmly:
It is another male.'

They said nothing more to each other, but he was pleas-
ed, and the incessant bending and stooping seemed less
arduous, and working on until the moon rose above a
bank of purple clouds, they finished the field and went
home.

After his meal and after he had washed his sunburnt
body in cool water and had rinsed his mouth with tea,
Wang Lung went in to look at his second son. O-lan had
lain herself upon the bed after the cooking of the meal
and the child lay beside her— a fat, pl?cid child, well
enough, but not so large as the first one. Wang Lung look-
ed at him and then went back to the middle room well
content. Another son, and another and another each year
—one could not trouble with red eggs every year; it was
enough to do it for the first. Sons every year; the house
was full of good fortune— this woman brought him no-
thing but good fortune. He shouted to his father:

'Now, Old One, with another grandson we shall have
to put the big one in your bed!'

The old man was delighted. He had for a long time been
desiring this child to sleep in his bed and warm his chilly
old flesh with the renewal of young bones and blood, but
the child would not leave his mother. Now, however,
staggering in with feet still unsteady with babyhood, he
stared at this new child beside his mother, and seeming
to comprehend with his grave eyes that another had his
place, he allowed himself without protest to be placed in
his grandfather's bed.

And again the harvests were good and Wang Lung gath-
ered silver from the selling of his produce and again he
hid it in the wall. But the rice he reaped from the land of
[the Hwangs brought him twice as much as that from his
own rice land. The earth of that piece was wet and rich
and the rice grew on it as weeds grow where they are not
wanted. And every one knew now that Wang Lung owned
this land and in his village there was talk of making him
die head. &



►056, 4.



49



WANG LUNG'S UNCLE BEGAN AT THIS TIME TO
become the trouble that from the beginning Wang Lung
had surmised he might become. This uncle was the younger
brother of Wang Lung's father, and by all the claims of
relationship he might depend upon Wang Lung if he had
not enough for himself and his family. So long as Wang
Lung and his father were poor and scantily fed the uncle
made muster to scratch about on his land and gather
enough to feed his seven children and his wife and himself.
But once fed none of them worked. The wife would not
stir herself to sweep the floor of their hut, nor did the
children trouble to wash the food from their faces. It was
a disgrace that as the girls grew older, and even to mar-
riageable age, they still ran about the village street and
left uncombed their rough, sun-browned hair, and some-
times even talked to men. Wang Lung, meeting his oldest
girl cousin thus one day, was so angered for the disgrace
done to his family that he dared to go to his uncle's wife
and say:

'Now, who will marry a girl like my cousin, whom any
man may look on? She has been marriageable these three
years and she runs about, and to-day I saw an idle lout on
the village street lay his hand on her arm and she answer-
ed him only with brazen laughter!'

His uncle's wife had nothing active in her body except
her tongue and this she now loosed upon Wang Lung.

6 Well, and who will pay for the dowry and for the wed-
ding and for the middleman's fees? It is all very well for
those to talk who have more land than they know what
to do with and who can yet go and buy more land from
the great families with their spare silver, but your uncle is
an unfortunate man and he has been so from the first. His
destiny is evil, and through no fault of his own. Heaven
wills it. Where others can produce good grain, for him
the seed dies in the ground and nothing but weeds spring
up; and this though he break his back!'

She fell into loud, easy tears and began to work herself

50



up into a fury. She snatched at her knot of hair on the back
of her head and tore down the loose hairs about her face
and she began to scream freely:

'Ah, it is something you do not know — to have an evil
destiny! Where the fields of others bear good rice and
wheat, ours bear weeds; where the houses of others stand
for a hundred years, the earth itself shakes under ours so
that walls crack; where others bear men, I, although I
conceive a son, will yet give birth to a girl — ah, evil des-
tiny!'

She shrieked aloud and the neighbour women rushed
out of their houses to see and to hear. Wang Lung stood
stoutly, however, and would finish what he came to say.

'Nevertheless,' he said, 'although it is not for me to
presume to advise the brother of my father, I will say this :
it is better that a girl be married away while she is yet vir-
gin; and whoever heard of a bitch dog who was allowed
on the streets who did not give birth to a litter?'

Having spoken thus plainly, he went away to his own
house and left his uncle's wife screaming. He had it in his
mind to buy more land this year from the House of Hwang
and more land year after year as he was able, and he dream-
ed of adding a new room to his house, and it angered
him that as he saw himself and his sons rising into a landed
family, this shiftless brood of his cousins should be run-
ning loose, bearing the same name as his own.

The next day his uncle came to the field where he was
working. O-lan was not there, for ten moons had pass-
ed since the second child was born and a third birth was
close upon her, and this time she was not so well, and for
a handful of days she had not come to the fields, and so
Wang Lung worked alone. His uncle came slouching along
a furrow, his clothes never properly buttoned about him,
but caught together and held insecurely with his girdle, so
that it always seemed that if a gust of wind blew at him
he might suddenly stand naked. He came to where Wang
Lung was, and he stood in silence while Wang Lung hoed
a narrow line beside the broad beans he was cultivating.
At last Wang Lung said maliciously and without look-
ing up:



51



€ 1 ask your pardon, my uncle, for not stopping in my |
work. These beans must, if they are to bear, as you know, I
be cultivated twice and thrice. Yours, doubtless, are finished. I
I am very slow — a poor farmer — never finishing my work I
in time to rest.'

His uncle understood perfectly Wang Lung's malice,
but he answered smoothly:

'I am a man of evil destiny. This year out of twenty I
seed beans, one came up, and in such a poor growth as I]
that there is no use in putting the hoe down. We shall have J
to buy beans this year if we eat them/ and he sighed heavily, j

Wang Lung hardened his heart. He knew that his uncle I
had come to ask something of him. He put his hoe down 1
into the ground with a long, even movement and with I
great care, breaking up the tiniest clod in the soft earth
already well cultivated. The bean-plants stood erect in
thrifty order, casting as they stood little fringes of clear
shadow in the sunshine. At last his uncle began to speak.

£ The person in my house has told me,' he said, 'of your
interest in my worthless oldest slave creature. It is wholly
true what you say. You are wise for your years. She should
be married. She is fifteen years old, and for these three or
four years could have given birth. I am terrified constantly
lest she conceive by some wild dog and bring shame to me
and to our name. Think of this happening in our respect-
able family, to me, the brother of your own father!'

Wang Lung put his hoe down hard into the soil. He
would have liked to speak plainly. He would have liked ;
to say:

'Why do you not control her, then? Why do you not \
keep her decently in the house and make her sweep and jh
clean and cook and make clothes for the family?' ; l

But one cannot say these things to an older generation. 1
He remained silent, therefore, and hoed closely about a
small plant, and he waited. t

If it had been my good destiny,' continued his uncle fl
mournfully, 'to have married a wife as your father did,
one who could work and at the same time produce sons, h
as your own does also, instead of a woman like mine, who ,ai
grows nothing but flesh and gives birth to nothing but i

5 2 i



females and that one idle son of mine who is less than a
male for his idleness, I, too, might have been rich now as
you are. Then might I have — willingly would I have —
shared my riches with you. Your daughters I would have
wed to good men, your son would I have placed in a
merchant's shop as apprentice and willingly paid the fee of
guaranty; your house would I have delighted to repair, and
you I would have fed with the best I had, you and your
father and your children, for we are of one blood.'
Wang Lung answered shortly :

'You know I am not rich. I have the five mouths to feed
now and my father is old and does not work, and still he
eats, and another mouth is being born in my house at this
very moment, for aught I know.'

His uncle replied shrilly:

"You are rich — you are rich! You have bought the land
j from the great house at the gods know what heavy price —

is there another in the village who could do this thing?'
| At this Wang Lung was goaded to anger. He flung down

his hoe and he shouted suddenly, glaring at his uncle:
'If I have a handful of silver it is because I work and my

wife works, and we do not, as some do, sit idling over
i a gambling-table or gossiping on doorsteps never swept,

letting the fields grow to weeds and our children go

half-fed!'

The blood flew into his uncle's yellow face and he|
| rushed at his nephew and slapped him vigorously on both
; cheeks.

'Now that,' he cried, 'for speaking so to your father's »
generation! Have you no religion, no morals, that you are
so lacking in filial conduct? Have you not heard it said
that in the Sacred Edicts it is commanded that a man is
never to correct an elder?'

Wang Lung stood sullen and immovable, conscious of
his fault but angry to the bottom of his heart against this
man who was his uncle.

'I will tell your words to the whole village!' screamed
his uncle in a high, cracked voice of fury. 'Yesterday you
o attack my house and call aloud in the streets that my
jt daughter is not a virgin; to-day you reproach me, who if

53



your father passes on, must be as your own father to you!
Now may my daughters all not be virgins, but not from
one of them would I hear such talk!' And he repeated
over and over, 'I will tell it to the village — I will tell it to
the village . . ♦' until at last Wang Lung said unwillingly:
'What do you want me to do?'

It touched his pride that this matter might indeed be
called out before the village. After all, it was his own flesh
and blood.

His uncle changed immediately. Anger melted out of
him. He smiled and he put his hand on Wang Lung's arm.

'Ah, I know you — good lad — good lad/ he said softly.
'Your old uncle knows you — you are my son. Son, a little
silver in this poor old palm — say, ten pieces, or even nine,
and I could begin to have arrangements with a matchmaker
for that slave of mine. Ah, you are right! It is time — it
is time!' He sighed and shook his head and he looked
piously to the sky.

Wang Lung picked up his hoe and threw it down again.

'Come to the house,' he said shortly. 'I do not carry
silver on me like a prince,' and he strode ahead, bitter
beyond speech because some of the good silver with which
he had planned to buy more land was to go into this palm
of his uncle's, from whence it would slip on to the gambling-
table before night fell.

He strode into the house, brushing out of his way his
two small sons who played, naked, in the warm sunshine
about the threshold. His uncle, with easy good nature,
called to the children and took from some recess in his
crumpled clothing a copper coin for each child. He pressed
the small fat shining bodies to him, and putting his nose
into their soft necks he smelled of the sun-browned flesh
with easy affection.

'Ah, you are two little men,' he said, clasping one in
either arm.

But Wang Lung did not pause. He went into the room
where he slept with his wife and the last child. It was
very dark, coming in as he did from the outer sunshine,
and except for the bar of light from the hole he could
see nothing. But the smell of warm blood which he



54



remembered so well filled his nostrils and he called out
sharply :

'What now — has your time come?*

The voice of his wife answered from the bed more
feebly than he had ever heard her speak:

"It is over once more. It is only a slave this time — -
not worth mentioning/ |j

Wang Lung stood still. A sense of evil struck him. A
girl! A girl was causing all this trouble in his uncle's house.
Now a girl had been born into his house as well.

He went without reply then to the wall and felt for the
roughness which was the mark of the hiding-place and he
removed the clod of earth. Behind it he fumbled among
the little heap of silver and he counted out nine pieces.

' Why are you taking the silver out?' said his wife suddenly
in the darkness.

'I am compelled to lend it to my uncle/ he replied
shortly.

His wife answered nothing at first and then she said in
her plain, heavy way:

'It is better not to say "lend." There is no lending in
that house. There is only giving.'

'Well I know that/ replied Wang Lung with bitter-
ness. 'It is cutting my flesh out to give to him and for
nothing except that we are of a blood.'

Then going out into the threshold he thrust the money
at his uncle and he walked quickly back to the field and
there he fell to working as though he would tear the earth
from its foundations. He thought for the time only of the
silver; he saw it poured out carelessly upon a gambling-
table, saw it swept up by some idle hand — his silver, the
silver he had so painfully collected from the fruits of his
fields, to turn it back again for more earth of his own.

It was evening before his anger was spent and he
straightened himself and remembered his home and his
food. And then he thought of that new mouth come that
day into his house, and it struck him with heaviness that^
the birth of daughters had begun for him, daughters who
do not belong to their parents, but are born and reared
for other families. He had not even thought, in his anger



5 5



at his uncle, to stop and see the face of this small, new
creature.

He stood leaning upon his hoe and he was seized with
sadness. It would be another harvest before he could buy
that land now, a piece adjoining the one he had, and there
was this new mouth in the house. Across the pale, oyster-
coloured sky of twilight a flock of crows flew, sharply
black, and whirred over him, cawing loudly. He watched
them disappear like a cloud into the trees about his house,
and he ran at them, shouting and shaking his hoe. They
rose again slowly, circling and re-circling over his head,
mocking him with their cries, and they flew at last into the
darkening sky.

He groaned aloud. It was an evil omen.

VIII

IT SEEMED AS THOUGH ONCE THE GODS TURNED
against a man they would not consider him again. The
rains, which should have come in early summer, withheld
themselves, and day after day the skies shone with fresh
and careless brilliance. The parched and starving earth
was nothing to them. From dawn to dawn there was not
a cloud, and at night the stars hung out of the sky, golden
and cruel in their beauty.

The fields, although Wang Lung cultivated them des-
perately, dried and cracked, and the young wheatstalks,
which had sprung up courageously with the coming of
spring and had prepared their heads for the grain, when
they found nothing coming for them from the soil or the
sky, ceased their growing and stood motionless at first
under the sun and at last dwindled and yellowed into a
barren harvest. The young rice beds which Wang Lung
had sowed were squares of jade upon the brown earth.
He carried water to them day after day after he had given
up the wheat, the heavy wooden buckets slung upon a
bamboo pole across his shoulders. But though a furrow
grew upon his flesh and a callous formed there as large as
a bowl, no rain came.

56



At last the water in the pond dried into a cake of clay
and even the water in the well sunk so low that O-lan said
to him:

c If the children must drink and the old man have his
hot water the plants must go dry.'

Wang Lung answered with anger that broke into a sob :

"Well, and they must all starve if the plants starve.' It
was true that all their lives depended upon the earth.

Only the piece of land by the moat bore harvest, and
this because at last when summer wore away without rain,
Wang Lung abandoned all his other fields and stayed the
day out at this one, dipping water from the moat to pour
upon the greedy soil. This year for the first time he sold
his grain as soon as it was harvested, and when he felt the
silver upon his palm he gripped it hard in defiance. He
would, he told himself, in spite of gods and drought, do
that which he had determined. His body he had broken
and his sweat he had spilled for this handful of silver, and
he would do what he would with it. And he hurried to
the House of Hwang and he met the land agent there and
he said without ceremony:

'I have that with which to buy the land adjoining mine
by the moat.'

Now Wang Lung had heard here and there that for the
House of Hwang it had been a year verging upon poverty.
The old lady had not had her dole of opium to the full
for many days and she was like an old tigress in her hunger
so that each day she sent for the agent and she cursed
him and struck his face with her fan, screaming at him:

'And are there not acres of land left, yet?' until he
was beside himself.

He had even given up the moneys which ordinarily he
held back from the family transactions for his own use, so
beside himself had he been. And as if this were not enough,
the Old Lord took yet another concubine, a slave who
was the child of a slave who had been his creature in her
youth, but who was now wed to a manservant in the
house, because the Old Lord's desire for her failed before
he took her into his room as concubine. This child of the
slave, who was not more than sixteen, he now saw with



57



fresh lust, for as he grew old and infirm and heavy with
flesh he seemed to desire, more and more, women who
were slight and young, even to childhood, so that there
was no slaking his lust. As the Old Mistress with her
opium, so he with his lusts; and there was no making him
understand there was not money for jade ear-rings for his
favourites, nor gold for their pretty hands. He could not
comprehend the words "no money" who all his life had
but to reach out his hand and fill it as often as he would.

And seeing their parents thus, the young lord shrugged
their shoulders and said there must still be enough for
their lifetime. They united in only one thing, and this was
to berate the agent for his ill-management of the estates,
so that he who had once been oily and unctuous, a man of
plenty and of ease, was now become anxious and harried
and his flesh gone so that his skin hung upon him like an
old garment.

Neither had Heaven sent rain upon the fields of the
House of Hwang, and there, too, there were no harvests,
and so when Wang Lung came to the agent crying, 'I
have, silver,' it was as though one came saying to the
hungry, 'I have food.'

The agent grasped at it, and where before there had
been dickering and tea-drinking, now the two men spoke
in eager whispers, and more quickly than they could speak
whole words, the money passed from one hand to the
other and papers were signed and sealed and the land was
Wang Lung's.

And once again Wang Lung did not count the passing
of silver, which was his flesh and his blood, a hard thing.
He bought with it the desire of his heart. He had now a
vast field of good land, for the new field was twice as
large as the first. But more to him than its dark fertility
was the fact that it had belonged once to the family of a
prince. And this time he told no one, not even O-lan,
what he had done.

Month passed into month and still no rain fell. As
autumn approached the clouds gathered unwillingly in the
sky, small, light clouds, and in the village street one could
see men standing about, idle and anxious, their faces up-

58



turned to the sky, judging closely of this cloud and that
discussing together as to whether any held rain in it. But
before sufficient cloud could gather for promise, a bitter
wind rose out of the north-west, the acrid wind of the
distant desert, and blew the clouds from the sky as one
gathers dust from a floor with a broom. And the sky was
empty and barren, and the stately sun rose each morning
and made its march and set solitary each night. And the
moon in its time shone like a lesser sun for clearness.

From his fields Wang Lung reaped a scanty harvest of
hardy beans, and from his cornfield, which he h^d planted
in despair when the rice beds had yellowed and died be-
fore ever the plants had been set into the watered field, he
plucked short stubby ears with the grains scattered here
and there. There was not a bean lost in the threshing. He
set the two little boys to sifting the dust of the thresh-
ing-floor between their fingers after he and the woman had
flailed the bean vines, and he shelled the corn upon the
floor in the middle room, watching sharply every grain that
flew wide. When he would have put the cobs away for
fuel, his wife spoke out:

'No — do not waste them in burning. I remember when
I was a child in Shantung when years like this came, even
the cobs we ground and ate. It is better than grass.'

When she had spoken they all fell silent, even the
children. Ther0 was foreboding in these strange brilliant
days when the land was failing them. Only the girl child
knew no fear. For her there were the mother's two great
breasts as yet filled for her needs. But O-lan, giving her
suck, muttered:

£ Eat, poor fool — eat, while there is yet that which can
be eaten.'

And then, as though there were not enough evil, O-lan
was again with child, and her milk dried up, and the
frightened house was filled with the sound of a child con-
tinually crying for food.

If one had asked Wang Lung, c And how are you fed
through the autumn?' he would have answered, 'I do not
know — a little food here and there.'



59



But there was none to ask him that. None asked of
any other in the whole countryside, 'How are you fed?'
None asked anything except of himself. "How shall I be
fed this day?' And parents said, 'How shall we be fed,
we and our children?'

Now Wang Lung's ox he had cared for as long as he
could. He had given the beast a bit of straw and a hand-
ful of vines as long as these lasted, and then he had gone
out and torn leaves from the trees for it until winter came
and these were gone. Then since there was no land to
plough, since seed, if it were planted, only dried in the
earth, and since they had eaten all their seed, he turned
the ox out to hunt for itself, sending the eldest boy to sit
upon its back all day and hold the rope passed through its
nostrils so that it would not be stolen. But latterly he had
not dared even to do this, lest men from the village, even
his neighbours, might overcome the lad and seize the ox
for food and kill it. So he kept the ox on the threshold
until it grew lean as its skeleton.

But there catne a day when there was no rice left and
no wheat left and there were only a few beans and a
meagre store of corn, and the ox lowed with its hunger
and the old man said:

'We will eat the ox, next.'

Then Wang Lung cried out, for it was to him as though
one said, 'We will eat a man next.' The ox was his com-
panion in the fields and he had walked behind and praised
it and cursed it as his mood was, and from his youth he
had known the beast, when they had bought it a small
calf. And he said:

'How can we eat the ox? How shall we plough again?'

But the old man answered, tranquil enough:

'Well, and it is your life or the beast's, and your son's
life or the beast's, and a man can buy an ox again more
•easily than his own life.'

But Wang Lung would not that day kill it. And the next
day passed and the next, and the children cried out for food
and they would not be comforted and O-lan looked at
Wang Lung, beseeching him for the children, and he saw
at last that the thing had to be done. So he said roughly :
60



'Let it be killed then, but I cannot do it.'

He went into the room where he slept and he laid himself
upon the bed and he wrapped the quilt about his head that
he might not hear the beast's bellowing when it died.

Then O-lan crept out and she took a great iron knife
she had in the kitchen and she cut a great gash in the
beast's neck, and thus she severed its life. And she took
a bowl and caught its blood to cook for them to eat in a
pudding, and she skinned and hacked to pieces the great
carcass, and Wang Lung would not come out until the
thing was wholly done and the flesh was cooked and upon
the table. But when he tried to eat the flesh of his ox his
gorge rose and he could not swallow it and he drank only
a little of the soup. And O-lan said to him:

'An ox is but an ox and this one grew old. Eat, for
there will be another one day and far better than this one.'

Wang Lung was a little comforted then, and he ate a
morsel and then more, and they all ate. But the ox was
eaten at last and the bones cracked for the marrow, and it
was all too quickly gone, and there was nothing left of it
except the skin, dried and hard and stretched upon the
rack of bamboo O-lan had made to hold it spread.

At first there had been hostility in the village against
Wang Lung because it was supposed that he had silver
which he was hiding and food stored away. His uncle,
who was among the first to be hungry, came importuning
to his door, and indeed the man and his wife and his
seven children had nothing to eat. Wang Lung measured
unwillingly into the skirt of his uncle's robe a small heap
of beans and a precious handful of corn. Then he pid
with firmness:

'It is all I can spare and I have first my old father to
consider, even if I had no children.'

When his uncle came again Wang Lung cried out:

'Even filial piety will not feed my house!' and he sent
his uncle empty away.

From that day his uncle turned, against him like a dog
that has been kicked, and he whispered about the village
in this house and in that:

'My nephew there, he has silver and he has food, but

61



he will give none of it to us, not even to me, and to my
children, who are his own bones and flesh. We can do
nothing but starve.'

And as family after family finished its store in the small
village and spent its last coin in the scanty markets of the
town, and the winds of winter came down from the desert,
cold as a knife of steel and dry and barren, the hearts
of the villagers grew distraught with their own hunger
and with the hunger of their pinched wives and crying
children, and when Wang Lung's uncle shivered about the
streets like a lean dog and whispered from his famished
lips, 'There is one who has food — there is one whose
children are fat, still,' the men took up poles and went one
night to the house of Wang Lung and beat upon the door.
And when he had opened to the voices of his neighbours,
they fell upon him and pushed him out of the doorway
and threw out of the house his frightened children, and
they fell upon every corner, and they scrabbled every surface
with their hands to find where he has hidden his food.
Then when they found his wretched store of a few dried
beans and a bowlful of dried corn they gave a great howl
of disappointment and despair, and they seized his bits
of furniture, the table and the benches and the old man
lay, frightened and weeping.

Then O-lan came forward and spoke, and her plain,
slow voice rose above the men:

'Not that — not that yet,' she called out. 'It is not yet
time to take our table and the benches and the bed from
our house. You have all our food. But out of your own
houses you have not sold yet your table and your benches.
Leave us ours. W T e are even. We have not a bean or a grain
of corn more than you — no, you have more than we, now,
for you have all of ours. Heaven will strike you if you take
more. Now, we will go out together and hunt for grass to
eat and bark from the trees, you for your children, and we
for our three children, and for this fourth who is to be born
in such times.' She pressed her hand to her belly as she
spoke, and the men were ashamed before her and went
out one by one, for they were not evil men except when
they starved.
62



One lingered, that one called Ching, a small, silent, yel-
low man with a face like an ape's in the best of times, and
now hollowed and anxious. He would have spoken some
good word of shame, for he was an honest man and only
his crying child had forced him to evil. But in his bosom
was a handful of beans he had snatched when the store was
found and he was fearful lest he must return them if he
spoke at all, and so he only looked at Wang Lung with
haggard, speechless eyes and he went out.

Wang Lung stood there in his yard where year after
year he had threshed his good harvests, and which had lain
now for many months idle and useless. There was nothing
left in the house to feed his father and his children — no-
thing to feed this woman of his who besides the nourish-
ment of her own body had this other one to feed into
growth, this other one who would, with the cruelty of new
and ardent life, steal from the very flesh and blood of its
mother. He had an instant of extreme fear. Then into his
blood like soothing wine flowed this comfort. He said in
his heart:

4 'They cannot take the land from me. The labour of my
body and the fruit of the fields I have put into that which
cannot be taken away. If I had the silver, they would have
taken it. If I haa bought with the silver to store it, they
would have taker^ it all. I have the land still, and it is mine.'



IX

WANG LUNG, SITTING AT THE THRESHOLD OF HIS
door, said to himself that now surely something must
be done. They could not remain here in this empty house
and die. In his lean body, about which he daily wrapped
more tightly his loose girdle, there was a determination to
live. He would not thus, just when he was coming into
the fullness of a man's life, suddenly be robbed of it by
a stupid fate. There was such anger in him now as he
often could not express. At times it seized him like a frenzy
so that he rushed out upon his barren threshing-floor and

63



shook his arms at the foolish sky that shone above him,
eternally blue and clear and cold and cloudless.

'Oh, you are too wicked, you Old Man in Heaven!'
he would cry recklessly. And if for an instant he were
afraid, he would the next instant cry sullenly, c And what
can happen to me worse than that which has happened!'

Once he walked, dragging one foot after another in his
famished weakness, to the temple of the earth, and de-
liberately he spat up on the face of the small, impertubable
god who sat there with his goddess. There were no sticks of
incense now before this pair, nor had there been for many
moons, and their paper clothes were tattered and showed
their clay bodies through the rents. But they sat there
unmoved by anything and Wang Lung gnashed his teeth
at them and walked back to his house groaning and fell
upon his bed.

They scarcely rose at all now, any of them. There was
no need, and fitful sleep took the place, for a while, at
least, of the food they had not. The cobs of the corn they
had dried and eaten, and they stripped the bark from
trees, and all over the countryside people were eating what
grass they could find upon the wintry hills. There was not an
animal anywhere. A man might walk for a handful of days
and see not an ox nor an ass nor any kind of beast or fowl.

The children's bellies were swollen out with empty wind,
and one never saw in these days a child playing upon the
village street. At most the two boys in Wang Lung's house
crept to the door and sat in the sun, the cruel sun that never
ceased its endless shining. Their once rounded bodies were
angular and bony now, sharp small bones like the bones
of birds, except for their ponderous bellies. The girl child
never even sat alone, although the time was past for this,
but lay uncomplaining hour after hour wrapped in an old
quilt. At first the angry insistence of her crying had filled
the house, but she had come to be quiet, sucking feebly
at whatever was put into her mouth and never lifting up
her voice. Her little hollowed face peered out at them ail,
little sunken blue lips like a toothless old woman's lips,
and hollow black eyes peering.

This persistence of the small life in some way won her

6 4



father's affection, although if she had been round and
merry as the others had been at her age he would have
been careless of her for a girl. Sometimes, looking at her
he whispered softly:

'Poor fool — poor little fool/ And once when she essayed
a weak smile with her toothless gums showing, he broke
into tears and took into his lean hard hand her small claw
and held the tiny grasp of her fingers over his forefinger.
Thereafter he would sometimes lift her, all naked as she
lay, and thrust her inside the scant warmth of his coat a-
gatnst his flesh and sit with her so by the threshold of the
house, looking out over the dry, flat fields.

As for the old man, he fared better than any, for if there
was anything to eat he was given it, even though the chil-
dren were without. Wang Lung said to himself proudly
that none should say in the hour of death he had forgotten
his father. Even if his own flesh went to feed him the old
man should eat. The old man slept day and night and ate
what was given him, and there was still strength in him to
creep about the dooryard at noon when the sun was warm.
He was more cheerful than any of them and he quavered
forth one day in his old voice that was like a little wind
trembling among cracked bamboos:

'There have been worse days — there have been worse
days. Once I saw men and women eating children.'

'There will never be such a thing in my house,' said
Wang Lung, in extremist horror.

There was a day when his neighbour, Ching, worn now
to less than the shadow of a human creature, came to the
door of Wang Lung's house and he whispered from his
lips that were dried and black as earth:

'In the town the dogs are eaten and everywhere the
horses and the fowls of every sort. Here we have eaten the
beasts that ploughed our fields and the grass and the bark
of trees. What now remains for food?'

Wang Lung shook his head hopelessly. In his bosom
lay the slight, skeleton-like body of his girl child, and he
looked down into the delicate bony face, and into the sharp,
Isad eyes that watched him unceasingly from his breast.

15056, 5.



When he caught those eyes in his glance, invariably there
wavered upon the child's face a flickering smile that broke
his heart.

Ching thrust his face nearer.

'In the village they are eating human flesh,' he whisper-
ed. 'It is said your uncle and his wife are eating. How else
are they living and with strength enough to walk about —
they, who, it is known, have never had anything?'

Wang Lung drew back from the deathlike head which
Ching had thrust forward as he spoke. With the man's
eyes close like this, he was horrible. Wang Lung was sud-
denly afraid with a fear he did not understand. He rose
quickly as though to cast off some entangling danger.

'We will leave this place,' he said loudly. 'We will go
south ! There are everywhere in this great land people who
starve. Heaven, however wicked, will not at once wipe
out the sons of Han.'

His neighbour looked at him patiently. 'Ah, you are
young,' he said sadly. 'I am older than you and my wife
is old and we have nothing except one daughter. We can
die well enough.'

'You are more fortunate than 1/ said Wang Lung. 'I
have my old father and these three small mouths and an-
other about to be born. We must go lest we forget our na-
ture and eat each other as the wild dogs do.'

And then it seemed to him suddenly that what he said
was very right, and he called aloud to O-lan, who lay upon
the bed day after day without speech, now that there was
no food for the stove and no fuel for the oven.

'Come, woman, we will go south!'

There was cheer in his voice such as none had heard
in many moons, and the children looked up and the old
man hobbled out from his room and O-lan rose feebly
from her bed and came to the door of their room and
clinging to the door frame she said :

'It is a good thing to do. One can at least die walking.'

The child in her body hung from her lean loins like a"
knotty fruit and from her face every particle of flesh was
gone, so that the jagged bones stood forth rock-like under
her skin. 'Only wait until to-morrow,' she said. 'I shall

66



have given birth by then. I can tell by this thing's move-
ments in me.'

'To-morrow, then,' answered Wang Lung, and then he
saw his wife's face and he was moved with a pity greater
than any he had had for himself. This poor creature was
dragging forth yet another!

'How shall you walk, you poor creature!' he muttered,
and he said unwillingly to his neighbour Ching, who still
leaned against the house by the door, 'If you have any
food left, for a good heart's sake give me a handful to save
the life of the mother of my sons, and I will forget that I
saw you in my house as a robber.'

Ching looked at him ashamed and he answered humbly :

'I have never thought of you with peace since that hour.
It was that dog, your uncle, who enticed me, saying that
you had good harvests stored up. Before this cruel heaven
I promise you that I have only a little handful of dried red
beans buried beneath the stone of my doorway. This I
and my wife placed there for our last hour, for our child
and ourselves, that we might die with a little food in our
stomachs. But some of it I will give to you. To-morrow
go south, if you can. I stay, I and my house. I am older than
you and I have no son, and it does not matter whether I
live or die.'

And he went away and in a little while he came back,
bringing tied in a cotton kerchief a double handful of
small red beans, mouldy with the soil. The children clam-
bered about at the sight of the food, and even the old man's
eyes glistened, but Wang Lung pushed them away for once
and he took the food in to his wife as she lay and she ate
a little of it, bean by bean, unwillingly, but her hour was
upon her and she knew that if she had not any food she
would die in the clutches of her pain.

Only a few of the beans did Wang Lung hide in his
own hand and these he put into his own mouth and he
chewed them into a soft pulp and then putting his lips to
the lips of his daughter he pushed into her mouth the food,
and watching her small lips move he felt himself fed.

That night he stayed in the middle room. The two boys

67



were in the old man's room, and in the third room O-lan
gave birth alone. He sat there as he had sat during the
birth of his first-born son and listened. She would not even
yet have him near her at her hour. She would give birth
alone, squatting over the old tub she kept for the purpose,
creeping about the room afterwards to remove the traces
of what had been, hiding .as an animal does the birth stains
of its young.

He listened intently for the small sharp cry he knew so
well, and he listened with despair. Male or female, it mat-
tered nothing to him now — there was only another mouth
coming which must be fed.

'It would be merciful if there were no breath,' he mut-
tered, and then he heard the feeble cry — how feeble a cry!
— hang for an instant upon the stillness. 'But there is no
mercy of any kind in these days,' he finished bitterly, and
he sat listening.

There was no second cry, and over the house the still-
ness became impenetrable. But for many days there had
been stillness everywhere — the stillness of inactivity and of
people, each in his own house, waiting to die This house
was filled with such stillness. Suddenly Wang Lung could
not bear it. He was afraid. He rose and went to the door
of the room where O-lan was and he called into the crack
and the sound of his own voice heartened him a little.

'You are safe?' he called to the woman. He listened.
Suppose she had died as he sat there! But he could hear
a slight rustling. She was moving about and at last she an-
swered, her voice a sigh :

'Come!'

He went in then, and she lay there upon the bed, her
body scarcely raising the cover. She lay alone.
'Where is the child?' he asked.

She made a slight movement of her hand upon the bed
and he saw upon the floor the child's body.
'Dead!' he exclaimed.
'Dead,' she whispered.

He stooped and examined the. handful of its body — a
wisp of bone and skin — a girl. He was about to say. 'But
I heard it crying — alive'; and then he looked at the woman's

68



face. Her eyes were closed and the colour of her flesh was
the colour of ashes and her bones stuck up under the skin —
a poor silent face that lay there, having endured to the ut-
most, and there was nothing he could say. After all, during
these months he had had only his own body to drag about.
What agony of starvation this woman had endured, with
the starved creature gnawing at her from within, desperate
for its own life !

He said nothing, but he took the dead child into the
other room and laid it upon the earthen floor and searched
until he found a bit of broken mat and this he wrapped
about it. The round head dropped this way and that and
upon the neck he saw two dark, bruised spots, but he finish-
ed what he had to do. Then he took the roll of matting,
and going as far from the house as he had strength, he laid
the burden against the hollowed side of an old grave. This
grave stood among many others, worn down and np long-
er known or cared for, on a hillside just at the border of
wang Lung's western field. He had scarcely put the burden
down before a famished, wolfish dog hovered almost at
once behind him, so falmished that although he took up a
small stone and threw it and hit its lean flank with a thud,
the animal would not stir away more than a few feet. At
last Wang Lung felt his legs sinking beneath him and
covering his face with his hands he went away.

'It is better as it is,' he muttered to himself, and for the
first time was wholly filled with despair.

The next morning when the sun rose unchanging in its
sky of varnished blue it seemed to him a dream that he
could ever have thought of leaving his house with these
helpless children and this weakened woman and this old
man. How could they drag their bodies over a hundred
miles, even to plenty? And who knew whether or not
even in the south there was food? One would say there
was no end to this brazen sky. Perhaps they would wear
out all their last strength only to find more starving people,
and strangers at that. Far better to stay where they could
die in their beds. He sat desponding on the threshold of
the door and gazed bleakly over the dried and hardened

69



fields from which every particle of anything that could be
called food or fuel had been plucked.

He had no money. Long ago the last coin was gone.
But even money would do little good now, for there was
no food to buy. He had heard earlier that there were rich
men in the town who were hoarding food for themselves
and for sale to the very rich, but even this ceased to anger
him. He did not feel this day that he could walk to the
town, even were it to be fed for nothing. He was, indeed,
not hungry.

The extreme gnawing in his stomach which he had had
at first was now past and he could stir up a little of the
earth from a certain spot in one of his fields and give it to
the children without desiring any of it for himself. This
earth they had been eating in water for some days — god-
dess of mercy earth, it was called, because it had some slight
nutritious quality in it, although in the end it could not
sustain life; but made into a gruel it allayed the children's
craving for a time and put something into their distended,
empty bellies. He steadfastly would not touch the few beans
that O-lan still held in her hand, and it comforted him
vaguely to hear her crunching them, one at a time, a long
time apart.

And then, as he sat there in the doorway, giving up his
hope and thinking with a dreamy pleasure of lying upon
his bed and sleeping easily into death, some on.", came across
the fields — men walking towards him. He continued to sit
as they drew near and he saw that one was his uncle and
with him were three men whom he did not know.

C I have not seen you these many days/ called his uncle
with loud and affected good humour. And as he drew near-
er he said in the same loud voice. ' And how well you have
fared! And your father, my elder brother, he is well?'

Wang Lung looked at his uncle. The man was thin, it
is true, but not starved, as he should be. Wang Lung felt
in his own shrivelled body the last remaining strength of
life gathering into a devastating anger against this man, I
his uncle.

'How you have eaten — how you have eaten!' he mut- |
tered thickly. He thought nothing of these strangers or of

7°



any courtesy. He saw only his uncle with flesh on his
bones, still. His uncle opened wide his eyes and threw, up
his hands to the sky.

'Eaten!' he cried. 'If you could see my house! Not a
sparrow even could pick up a crumb there. My wife — do
you remember how fat she was ? How fair and fat and oily
her skin? And now she is like a garment hung on a pole —
nothing but the poor bones rattling together in her skin.
And of our children only four are left — the three little
ones gone — gone — and as for me, you see me!' He took
the edge of his sleeve and wiped the corner of each eye
carefully.

'You have eaten,' repeated Wang Lung dully.

'I have thought of nothing but of you and of your fa-
ther, who is my brother,' retorted his uncle briskly, 'and
now I prove it to you. As soon as I could, I borrowed from
these good men in the /town a little food on the promise
that with the strength it gave me I would help them to
buy some of the land about our village. And then I thought
of your good land first of all, you, the son of my brother.
They have come to buy your land and to give you money —
food — life!' His uncle, having said these words, stepped
back and folded his arms with a flourish of his dirty and
ragged robes.

Wang Lung did move. He did not rise nor in any
way recognise the men who had come. But he lifted his
head to look at them and he saw that they were indeed
men from the town, dressed in long robes of solid silk.
Their hands were soft and their nails long. They looked
as though they had eaten and as if blood still ran rapidly
in their veins. He suddenly hated them with an immense
hatred. Here were these men from the town, having eaten
and drunk, standing beside him whose children were starv-
ing and eating the very earth of the fields; here they were,
come to squeeze his land from him in his extremity. He
looked up at them sullenly, his eyes deep and enormous in
his bony, skull-like face.

'I will not sell my land,' he said.

His uncle stepped forward. At this instant the younger
of Wang Lung's two sons came creeping to the doorway

7 1



upon his hands and knees. Since he had so little strength
in these latter days the child at times had gone back to
crawling as he used in his babyhood.

'Is that your lad?' cried the uncle, 'the little fat lad I
gave a copper to in the summer ?'

And they all looked at the child, and suddenly Wang
Lung, who through all this time had not wept at all, began
to weep silently, the tears gathering in great knots of pain
in his throat and rolling down his cheeks.

'What is your price?' he whispered at last. Well, there
were these three children to be fed — the children and the
old man. He and his wife could dig themselves graves in
the land and lie down in them and sleep. Well, but here
were these,

And then one of the men from the city spoke, a man with
one eye blind and sunken in his face, and unctuously he
said:

'My poor man, for the sake of the boy who is starving,
we will give you a better price than could be got in these
times anywhere. We will give you' — he paused and then
he said harshly — c we will give you a string of a hundred
pence for an acre!'

Wang Lung laughed bitterly. 'Why, that,' he cried, 'that
is taking my land for a gift. Why, I pay twenty times that
when I buy land!' ~J

'Ah, but not when you buy it from men who are star-
ving,' said the other man from the city. He was a small,
slight fellow with a high thin nose, but his voice came out
of him unexpectedly large and coarse and hard.

Wang Lung looked at the three of them. They were
sure of him, these men! What will not a man give for his
starving children and his old father ! The weakness of sur-
render in him melted into an anger such as he had never
known in his life before. He sprang up and at the men as a
dog springs at an enemy,
f 'I shall never sell the land!' he shrieked at them. 'Bit by
bit I will dig up the fields and feed the earth itself to the
children and when they die I will bury them in the land,
and I and my wife and my old father, even he, we will die
on the land that has given us birth!' ~j

7 2



He was weeping violently and his anger went out of
him as suddenly as a wind and he stood shaking and weep-
ing. The men stood here smiling slightly,his uncle among
them, unmoved. This talk was madness and they waited
until Wang's anger was spent.

And then suddenly O-lan came to the door and spoke
to them, her voice flat and commonplace as though every
day such things were.

'The land we will not sell, surely,' she said, 'else when
we return from the south we shall have nothing to feed us.
But we will sell the table and the two beds and the bedding
and the four benches and even the cauldron from the stove.
But the rakes and the hoe and the plough we will not sell,
nor the land.'

There was some calmness in her voice which carried
more strength than all Wang Lung's anger, and Wang
Lung's uncle said uncertainly:

'Will you really go south?'

At last the one-eyed man spoke to the others and they
muttered among themselves and the one-eyed man turned
and said:

'They are poor things and fit only for fuel. Two silver
bits for the lot and take it or leave it.'

He turned away with contempt as he spoke, but O-lan
answered tranquillly:

'It is less than the cost of one bed, but if you have the
silver give it to me quickly and take the things.'

The one-eyed man fumbled in his girdle and dropped
the silver into her outstretched hand, and the three men
came into the house and between them they took out the
table and the benches and the bed in Wang Lung's room
I with its bedding, and they wrenched the cauldron from the
I earthen oven in which it stood. But when they went into
the old man's room Wang Lung's uncle stood outside. He
mid not wish his elder brother to see him, nor did he wish
to be there when the old man was laid on the floor and
the bed taken from under him. When all was finished and
the house was wholly empty except for the two rakes and
the two hoes and the plough in one corner of the middle
room, O-lan said to her husband:



73



'Let us go while we have the two bits of silver and
before we must sell the rafters of the house and have no
hole into which we can crawl when we return.'

And Wang Lung answered heavily, 'Let us go.'

But he looked across the fields at the small figures of
the men receding and he muttered over and over, 'At least
v' I have the land — I have the land.'



X

THERE WAS NOTHING TO DO BUT TO PULL THE
door tight upon its wooden hinges and fasten the iron
hasp. All their clothes they had upon them. Into each child's
hands O-lan thrust a rice bowl and a pair of chopsticks and
the two little boys grasped at them eagerly and held them
tight as a promise of food to come. Thus they started across
the fields, a dreary small procession moving so slowly that
it seemed they would never reach the wail of the town.

The girl Wang Lung carried in his bosom until he saw
that the old man would fall and then he gave the child to
O-lan and stooping under his father he lifted him on his
back and carried him, staggering under the old man's dry,
wind-light frame. They went on in complete silence past
the little temple with the two small stately gods within,
who never noticed anything that passed. Wang Lung was
sweating with his weakness in spite of the cold and bitter
wind. This wind never ceased to blow on them and against
them, so that the two boys cried of its cold. But Wang
Lung coaxed them saying:

'You are two big men and you are travellers to the south.
There is warmth there and food every day, white rice every
day for all of us and you shall eat and you shall eat.'

In time they reached the gate of the wall, resting con-
tinually every little way, and where Wang Lung had once
delighted in its coolness, now he clenched his teeth against
the gust of wintry wind that swept furiously through its
channel as icy water will rush between cliffs. Beneath their
feet the mud was thick and speared through with needles

74



of ice and the little boys could make no headway and O-lan
was laden with the girl and desperate under the weight of
her own body. Wang Lung staggered through with the
old man and set him down and then went back and lifted
each child and carried him through, and then when it was
over at last his sweat poured out of him like rain, spending
all his strength with it, so that he had to lean for a long time
against the damp wall, his eyes shut and his breath coming
and going quickly, and his family stood shivering and wait-
ing about him.

They were close to the gate of the great house now, but
it was locked fast, the iron doors reared full to their height
and the stone lions grey and windbitten on either side. Up-
on the doorsteps lay cowering a few dingy shapes of men
and women, who gazed, famished, upon the closed and
barred gate, and when Wang Lung passed with his miser-
able little procession one cried out in a cracked voice.

'The hearts of these rich-axe hard like the hearts of the
gods. They have still rice to eat and from the rice they do
not eat they are still making wine, while we starve.'

And another moaned forth:

'Oh, if I had an instant's strength in this hand of mine I
would set fire to the gates and to those houses and courts
within, even though I burned in the fire. A thousand curses
to the parents that bore the children of Hwang!'

But W T ang Lung answered nothing to all this and in si-
lence they went on towards the south.

When they had passed through the town and had come
out on the southern side, which they did so slowly that it
was evening and near to darkness, they found a multitude
of people going toward the south. Wang Lung was be-
ginning to think of what corner of the wall they had better
choose for sleeping as well as they could huddled together,
when he suddenly found himself and his family caught in
a multitude, and he asked of one who pressed against him :

'Where is all this multitude going?'

And the man said:

'We are starving people and we are going to catch the
fire-wagon and ride to the south. It leaves from yonder



75



house and there are wagons for such as we for the price
of less than a small silver piece/

Fire- wagons! One had heard of them. Wang Lung in
days past in the tea-shop had heard men tell of these wagons,
chained one to the other and drawn neither by man nor
beast, but by a machine breathing forth fire and water like
a dragon. He had said to himself many times then that on a
holiday he would go and see it, but with one thing and an-
other in the fields there was never time, he being well to the
north of the city. Then there was always distrust of that
which one did not know and understand. It is not well for
a man to know more than is necessary for his daily living.

Now, however, he turned doubtfully to the woman and
said:

'Shall we also then go on this fire-wagon?'

They drew the old man and the children a little away
from the passing crowd and looked at each other anxiously
and afraid. At the instant's respite the old man sank upon
the ground and the little boy lay in the dust, heedless of
the feet trampling everywhere about them. O-lan carried
the girl child still, but the child's head hung over her arm
with such a look of death on its closed eyes that Wang
Lung, forgetting all else, cried out:

'Is the little slave already dead?'

O-lan shook her head.

'Not yet. The breath flutters back and forth in her. But
she will die this night and all of us unless '

And then as if she could say no other word she looked
at him, her square face exhausted and gaunt. Wang Lung
answered nothing, but to himself he thought that another
day of walking like this one and they would all be dead
by night, and he said with what cheer there was to be
found in his voice:

'Up, my sons, and help the grandfather up. We will go
on the fire-wagon and sit while we walk south.'

But whether or not they could have moved none knows,
had there not come thundering out of the darkness a noise
like a dragon's voice and two great eyes puffing fire out,
so that every one screamed and ran. And pressing forward
in the confusion they were pushed hither and thither, but

76



always clinging desperately together, until they were pushed
somehow in the darkness and in the yelling and crying of
many voices into a small open door and into a box-like
room, and then with an incessant roaring the thing in
which they rode tore forth into the darkness, bearing them
in its vitals.

XI

WITH HIS TWO PIECES OF SILVER WANG LUNG PAID
for a hundred miles of road and the officer who took his
silver from him gave him back a handful of copper pence,
and with a few of these Wang Lung bought from a vendor,
who thrust his tray of wares in at a hole in the wagon as
\ soon as it stopped, four small loaves of bread and a bowl
of soft rice for the girl. It was more than they had had to
eat at one time for many days^and although they were star-
! ved for food, when it was in their mouths desire left them
: and it was only by coaxing that the boys could be made to
I swallow. But the old man sucked perseveringly at the bread
i between his toothless gums.

'One must eat/ he cackled forth, very friendly to all who
; pressed about him as the fire-wagon rolled and rocked on
its way. 'I do not care that my foolish belly is grown lazy
after all these days of little to do. It must be fed. I will not
s die because it does not wish to work.' And men laughed
suddenly at the smiling, wizened little old man, whose
j sparse white beard was scattered all over his chin.

But not all the copper pence did Wang Lung spend on
I food. He kept back all he was able to buy mats to build a
jshed for them when they reached the south. There were
| men and women in the fire-wagon who had been south in
i other years; some who went each year to the rich cities of
i the south to work and to beg and thus save the price of
jfood. And Wang Lung, when he had grown used to the
I wonder of where he was and to the astonishment of seeing
the land whirl by the holes in the wagon, listened to what
these men said. They spoke with the loudness of wisdom
where others are ignorant.

'First you must buy six mats/ said one, a man with coarse,

77



hanging lips like a camel's mouth. These are two pence
for one mat, if you are wise and do not act like a country
bumpkin, in which case you will be charged three pence,
which is more than is necessary, as I very well know. I
cannot be fooled by the men in the southern cities, even if
they are rich.' He wagged his head and looked about for
admiration. Wang Lung listened anxiously.

'And then?' he urged. He sat squatting upon his haunch-
es on the bottom of the wagon, which was, after all.
only an empty room made of wood, with nothing to sit
upon and the wind and the dust flying up through the cracks
in the floor.

'Then,' said the man more loudly still, raising his voice
above the din of the iron wheels beneath them, 'then you
bind these together into a hut and then you go out to beg,
first smearing yourself with mud and filth to make your-
selves as piteous as you can.'

Now Wang Lung had never in his life begged of any
man and he disliked this notion of begging of strange peo-
ple in the south.

'One must beg?' he repeated.

'Ah, indeed,' said the coarse-mouthed man, 'but not
until you have eaten. These people in the south have so
much rice that each morning you may go to a public kitch-
en and for a penny hold as much as you can in your belly
of the white rice gruel. Then you can beg comfortably and
buy bean-curd and cabbage and garlic'

Wang Lung withdrew a little from the others and turned
himself about to the wall and secretly with his hand in his
girdle he counted out the pence he had left. There was
enough for the six mats and enough each for a penny for
rice and beyond that he had three pence left. It came over
him with comfort that thus they could begin the new life.
But the notion of holding up a bowl and begging of any
one who passed continued to distress him. It was very well
for the old man and for the children and even for the wom-
an, but he had his two hands.

'Is there no work for a man's hands?' he asked of the
man suddenly, turning about.

'Aye, work!' said the man with contempt, and he spat

78



upon the floor. c You can pull a rich man in a yellow rick-
shaw if you like, and sweat your blood out with heat as
you run and have your sweat freeze into a coat of ice on
you when you stand waiting to be called. Give me begging!
And he cursed a round curse, so that Wang Lung would
not ask anything of him further.

But still it was a good thing that he had heard what the
man said, for when the fire-wagon had carried them as far
as it would and had turned them out upon the ground,
Wang Lung had ready a plan and he set the old man and
the children against a long grey wall of a house, which
stood there, and he told the woman to watch them, and he
went off to buy the mats, asking of this one and that where
the market streets lay. At nr^t4*e-could scarcely understand
what was said to him, so brittle and sharp was the sound
which these southerners made when they spoke, and sever-
al times when he asked and they did not understand, they
were impatient, and he learned to observe what sort of
man he asked of and to choose one with a kindlier face,
for these southerners had tempers which were quick and
easily ruffled.

But he found the mat shop at last on the edge of the city
and he put his pennies down upon the counter as one who
knew the price of the goods and he carried away his roll
of mats. When he returned to the spot where he had left
the others, they stood there waiting, although when he
came the boys cried out at him in relief, and he saw that
they had been filled with terror in this strange place. Only
the old man watched everything with pleasure and astonish-
ment and he murmured at Wang Lung:

£ You see how fat they all are, these southerners, and how
pale and oily are their skins. They eat pork every day, doubt-
less.'

But none who passed looked at Wang Lung and his
family. Men came and went along the cobbled highway to
the city, busy and intent and never glancing aside at beg-
gars, and every little while a caravan of donkeys came patter-
ing by, their small feet fitting neatly to the stones, and
they were laden with baskets of brick for the building of
houses and with great bags of grain crossed upon their

79



swaying backs. At the end of each caravan the driver rode
on the hindermost beast, and he carried a great whip, and
this whip he cracked with a terrific noise over the backs of
the beasts, shouting as he did so. And as he passed Wang
Lung each driver gave him a scornful and haughty look,
and no prince could have looked more haughty than these
drivers in their rough work coats as they passed by the
small group of persons, standing wondering at the edge of
the roadway. It was the especial pleasure of each driver,
seeing how strange Wang Lung and his family were, to
crack his whip just as he passed them, and the sharp explo-
sive cut of the air made them leap up, and seeing them leap
the drivers guffawed, and Wang Lung was angry when this
happened two and three times and he turned away to see
where he could put his hut.

There were already other huts clinging to the wall be-
hind them, but what was inside the wall none knew and
there was no way of knowing. It stretched out long and
grey and very high, and against the base the small mat sheds
clung like fleas to a dog's back. Wang Lung observed the
huts and he began to shape his own mats this way and that,
but they were stiff and clumsy things at best, being made
of split reeds, and he despaired, when suddenly O-lan said :

"That I can do. I remember it in my childhood.'

And she placed the girl upon the ground and pulled the
mats thus and thus, and shaped a rounded roof reaching to
the ground and high enough for a man to sit under and not
strike the top, and upon the edges of the mats that were
upon the ground she placed bricks that were lying about
and she set the boys to picking up more bricks. When it
was finished they went within and with one mat she had
contrived not to use they made a floor and sat down and
were sheltered.

Sitting thus and looking at each other, it seemed less
than possible that the day before they had left their own
house and their land and that these were now a hundred
miles away. It was a distance vast enough to have taken
them weeks of walking and at which they must have died,
some of them, before it was done.

Then the general feeling of plenty in this rich land, where

80'



no one seemed even hungered, filled them, and when Wang
Lung said, 'Let us go and seek the public kitchens,' they
rose up almost cheerfully and went out once more, and
this time the small boys clattered their chopsticks against
their bowls as they walked, for there would soon be some-
thing to put into them. And they found soon why the huts
were built to that long wall, for a short distance beyond
the northern end of it was a street and along the street many
people walked carrying bowls and buckets and vessels of
tin, all empty, and these persons were going to the kitchens
for the poor, which were at the end of the street and not
far away. And so Wang Lung and his family mingled with
these others and with them^they^came at last to two great
buildings made of mats, and every one crowded into the
open end of these buildings.

Now in the rear of each building were earthen stoves,
but larger than Wang Lung had ever seen, and on them
iron cauldrons as big as small ponds; and when the great
wooden lids were pried up, there was the good white rice
bubbling and boiling, and clouds of fragrant steam rose
up. Now when the people smelled this fragrance of rice
it was the sweetest in the world to their nostrils, and they
all pressed forward in a great mass and people called out
and mothers shouted in anger and fear lest their children
be trodden upon and little babies cried, and the men who
opened the cauldron roared forth:

j 'Now there is enough for every man and each in his
turn!'

But nothing could stop the mass of hungry men and
women and they fought like beasts until all were fed.
Wang Lung, caught in their midst, could do nothing but
cling to his father and his two sons and when he was swept
to the great cauldron he* held out his bowl and when it
was filled threw down his pence, and it was all he could
|do to stand sturdily and not be swept on before the thing
was done.

Then when they had come to the street again and stood
eating their rice, he ate and was filled and there was a
little left in his bowl, and he said:

'I will take this home to eat in the evening.'

81

5056, 6.



But a man stood near who was some sort of a guard
of the place for he wore a special garment of blue and red,
and he said sharply:

'No, and you can take nothing away except what is
in your belly.' And Wang Lung marvelled at this and
said:

'Well, if I have paid my penny what business is it of
yours if I carry it within or without me?'
The man said then:

'We must have this rule, for there are those whose
hearts are so hard that they will come and buy this rice
that is given for the poor — for a penny will not feed any
man like this — and they will carry the rice home to feed
to their pigs for slop. And the rice is for men and not
for pigs.'

Wang Lung listened to this in astonishment and he
cried :

'Are there men as hard as this!' And then he said,
'But why should any give like this to the poor, and who
is it that gives?'

The man answered then:

'It is the rich and the gentry of the town who do it,
and some do it for a good deed for the future, that by
saving lives they may get merit in heaven, and some do it
for righteousness that men may speak well of them.

'Nevertheless it is a good deed for whatever reason,'
said Wang Lung, 'and some must do it out of a good
heart.' And then seeing that the man did not answer him,
he added in his own defence, 'at least there are a few of
these?'

But the man was weary of speaking with him and he
turned his back, and he hummed an idle tune. The chil-
dren tugged at Wang Lung then, and Wang Lung led
them all back to the hut they had made, and there they
laid themselves down and they slept until the next morning,
for it was the first time since summer they had been filled
with food, and sleep overcame them with fullness.

The next morning it was necessary that there be more
money, for they spent the last copper coin upon the morn-
ing's rice. Wang Lung looked at G-lan, doubtful as to

82



what should be done. But it was not with the despair with
which he had looked at her over their blank and empty
fields. Here with the coming and going of well-fed people
upon the streets, with meat and vegetables in the markets,
with fish swimming in the tubs in the fish market, surely
it was npt possible for a man and his children to starve. ,
It was not as it was in their own land, where even silver
could not buy food because there was none. And O-lan
answered him steadily, as though this were the life she had
known always:

'I and the children/tan beg and the old man also. His
grey hairs will move some who will not give to me.'

And she called the two boys to her, for, like children
they had forgotten everything except that they had food
again and were in a strange place, and they ran to the
street and stood staring at all that passed, and she said to
them:

'Each of you take your bowls and hold them thus and
cry out thus '

And she took her empty bowl in her hand and held it
out and called piteously:

'A heart, good sir — a heart, good lady! Have a kind
heart — a good deed for your life in heaven! The small
cash — the copper coin you throw awav — feed a starving
child!'

The little boys stared at her, and Wang Lung also.
Where had she learned to cry thus? How much of this
woman there was that he did not know! She answered
his look saying:

'So I called when I was a child and so I was fed. In
such a year as this I was sold a slave/

Then the old man, who had been sleeping, awoke, and
they gave him a bowl, and the four of them went out on
the road to beg. The woman began to call out and to
shake her bowl at every passer-by. She had thrust the girl
child into her naked bosom, and the child slept, and its
head bobbed this way and that as she moved, running
hither and thither with her bowl outstretched before her.
She pointed to the child as she begged, and she cried
loudly:

83



'Unless you give, good sir, good lady — this child dies

— we starve — we starve 9 And indeed the child looked

dead, its head shaking this way and that, and there were
some, a few, who tossed her unwillingly a small cash.

But the boys after a while began to take the begging
as play and the elder one was ashamed and grinned
sheepishly as he begged, and then their mother perceiving
it dragged them into the hut and she slapped them soundly
upon their jaws, and she scolded them with anger.

'And do you talk of starving and then laugh at the
same time! You fools, starve then!' And she slapped
them again and again until her own hands were sore and
until the tears were running freely down their faces and
they were sobbing, and she sent them out saying:

'Now you are fit to beg! That and more if you laugh
again!'

As for Wang Lung, he went into the streets and asked
hither and thither until he found a place where jinrickshaws
were for hire, and he went in and hired one for the day
for the price of half a round of silver to be paid at night,
and then dragged the thing after him out to the street
again.

Pulling this rickety, wooden wagon on its two wheels
behind him, it seemed to him that every one looked at
him for a fool. He was as awkward between its shafts as
an ox yoked for the first time to the plough, and he could
scarcely walk; yet must he run if he were to earn his
living, for here and there and everywhere through the
streets of this city men ran as they pulled other men in
these. He went into a narrow side street where there were
no shops but only doors of homes closed and private, anc
he went up and down for a while pulling to accustom
himself, and just as he said to himself in despair that he
had better beg, a door opened, and an old man, spectacled,
and garbed as teacher, stepped forth and hailed him.

Wang Lung at first began to tell him that he was too
new at it to run, but the old man was deaf, for he hearc
nothing of what Wang Lung said, only motioning to him
tranquilly to lower the shafts and let him step in, anc

84



Wang Lung obeyed, not knowing what else to do, and
feeling compelled to it by the deafness of the old man
and by his well-dressed and learned looks. Then the old
man, sitting erect, said:

'Take me to the Confucian temple,' and there he sat,
erect and calm, and there was that in his calmness which
allowed no question,^ that Wang started forward as he
saw others do, although he had not the faintest knowledge
of where the Confucian temple stood.

But as he went he asked, and since the road lay along
crowded streets, with the vendors passing back and forth
with their baskets and women going out to market, and
carriages drawn by horses, and many other vehicles like
the one he pulled, and everything pressing against another
so that there was no possibility of running, he walked as
swiftly as he was able, conscious always of the awkward
bumping of his load behind him. To loads upon his back
he was used, but not to pulling, and before the walls of
the temple were in sight his arms were aching and his
hands blistered, for the shafts pressed spots where the hoe
did not touch.

The old teacher stepped forth out of the rickshaw when
Wang Lung lowered it as he reached the temple gates, and
feeling in the depths of his bosom he drew out a small
silver coin and gave it to Wang Lung, saying:

'Now I never pay more than this, and there is no use
in complaint.' And with this he turned away and went
into the temple.

Wang Lung had not thought to complain for he had
not seen this coin before, and he did not know for how
many pence it could be changed. He went to a rice shop
near by where money is changed, and the changer gave
him for the coin twenty-six pence, and Wang Lung mar-
velled at the ease with which money comes in the south.
But another rickshaw-puller stood near and leaned over
as he counted, and he said to Wang Lung:

'Only twenty-six. How far did you pull that old head?'
And when Wang told him, the man cried out, 'Now there is
a small-hearted old man ! He gave you only half the proper
fare. How much did you argue for before you started?'

85



'I did not argue,' said Wang Lung. 'He said "Come"
and I came.'

The other man looked at Wang Lung pityingly,

'Now there is a country lout for you, pigtail and all!'
he called out to the bystanders. 'Some one says come
and he comes, and he never asks, this idiot born of idiots,
"How much will you give me if 1 come?" Know this,
idiot, only white foreigners can be taken without argument !
Their tempers are like quicklime, but when they say "Come"
you may come and trust them, for they are such fools
they do not know the proper price of anything, but let
the silver run out of their pockets like water.' And every
one listening laughed.

Wang Lung said nothing. It was true that he felt very
humble and ignorant in all this crowd of city people, and
he pulled his vehicle away without a word in answer.

'Nevertheless, this will feed my children to-morrow,'
he said to himself stubbornly, and then he remembered
that he had the rent of the vehicle to pay at night and
that indeed there was not yet half enough to do that.

He had one more passenger during the morning and
with this one he argued and agreed upon a price, and in
the afternoon two more called to him. But at night, when
he counted out all his money in his hand he had only a
penny above the rent of the rickshaw, and he went back
to his hut in great bitterness, saying to himself that for
labour greater than the labour of a day in a harvest field
he had earned only one copper penny. Then there came
flooding over him the memory of his land. He had not
remembered it once during this strange day, but now the
thought of it lying back there, far away, it is true, but
waiting and his own, filled him with peace, and so h
came to his hut.

When he entered there he found that O-lan had fo
her day's begging received forty small cash, which is less
than fivepence, and of the boys, the elder had eight cash
and the younger thirteen, and with these put together
there was enough to pay for the rice in the morning.
Only when they put the younger boy's in with all, he
howled for his own, and he loved the money he had

86



begged, and slept with it that night in his hand, and they
could not take it from him until he gave it himself for his
own rice.

But the old man had received nothing at all. All day-
long he had sat by the roadside obediently enough, but he
did not beg. He slept smd woke and stared at what passed
him, and when he grew weary he slept again. And being
of the older generation, he could not be reproved. When
he saw that his hands were empty he said merely:

C I have ploughed land, and I have sown seed, and I
have reaped harvest, and thus have I filled my rice bowl.
And I have beyond this begotten a son and son's sons.'

And with this he trusted like a child that now he would
be fed, seeing that he had a son and grandsons.

XII

NOW AFTER THE FIRST SHARPNESS OF WANG LUNG'S
hunger was over, when he saw that children had daily
something to eat, when he knew there was every morn-
ing rice to be had and of his day's labour and of O-lan's
begging enough to pay for it, the strangeness of his
life passed, and he began to feel what this city was to
whose fringes he clung. Running about the streets every
day and all day long he learned to know the city after a
fashion, and he saw this and that of its secret parts. He
learned that in the morning the people he drew in his
vehicle, if they were women, went to the market, and if
they were men, they went to the schools and to the
house of business. But what sort of schools these were he
had no way of knowing, beyond the fact that they were
called such names as "The Great School of Western Learn
ing" or as "The Great School of China", for he never went
beyond the gates, and if he had gone in well he knew
some one would have come to ask him what he did out of
his place. And what houses of business they were to which
he drew men he did not know, since when he was paid
it was all he knew.

And at night he knew that he drew men to big tea-

87



houses and to places of pleasure, the pleasure that is open
and streams out upon the streets in the sound of music
and of gaming with pieces of ivory and bamboo upon a
wooden table, and the pleasure that is secret and silent
and hidden behind walls. But none of these pleasures did
Wang Lung know for himself, since his feet crossed no
threshold except that of his own hut, and his road was /
always ended at a gate. 'He lived in the rich city as alien
as a rat in a rich man's house that is fed of scraps thrown
away, and hides here and there, and is never a part of the
real life of the house. I . —

So it was that, although a hundred miles are not so
far as a thousand, and land road never so far as water
road, yet Wang Lung and his wife and children were like
foreigners in this southern city. It is true that the people
who went about the streets had black hair and eyes as
Wang Lung and all family had, and as all did in the coun-
try where Wang Lung was born, and it is true that if one
listened to the language of these southerners it could be
understood, if with difficulty.

But Anhwei is not Kiangsu. In Anhwei, where Wang
Lung was born, the language is slow and deep and it wells
from the throat. But in the Kiangsu city where they now
lived the people spoke in syllables which splintered from
their lips and from the ends of their tongues. And where
Wang Lung's fields spread out in slow and leisurely harvest
twice a year of wheat and rice and a bit of corn and beans
and garlic, here in the farms about the city men urged
their land with perpetual stinking fertilising of human
wastes to force the land to a hurried bearing of this ve-
getable and that besides their rice.

In Wang Lung's country a man, if he had a roll of
good wheat bread and a sprig of garlic in it, had a good
meal and needed no more. But here the people dabbled
with pork balls and bamboo sprouts and chestnuts stewed
with chicken and goose giblets and this and that of vege-
tables, and when an honest man came by smelling of
yesterday's garlic, they lifted their noses and cried out,
'Now here is a reeking, pig-tailed northerner!' The smell
of the garlic would make the very shopkeepers in the cloth-

88



shops raise the price of blue cotton cloth as they might
raise the price for a foreigner.

But then the little village of sheds clinging to the wall
never became a part of the city or of the countryside which
stretched beyond, and once when Wang Lung heard a
young man haranguing/Sfcrowd at the corner of the Con- ;
fucian temple, where any man may stand, if he have the j
courage to speak out, and the young man said that China \
must have a revolution and must rise against the hated
foreigners, Wang Lung was alarmed and slunk away, feeling
that he was the foreigner against whom the young man ;
spoke with such passion. And when on another day he ?
heard another young man speaking — for this city was full
pf young men speaking — and he said at his street corner
that the people of China must unite and must educate
themselves in these times, it did not occur to Wang Lung
that any one was speaking to him.

It was only one day when he was on the street of the
silk markets looking for a passenger that he learned better
than he had known, and that there were those who were j
more foreign than he in this city. He happened on this
day to pass by the door of a shop from whence ladies
sometimes came after purchasing silks within, and some- j
times thus he secured one who paid him better than most.
And on this day some one did come out on him suddenly,
a creature the like of whom he had never seen before. He
had no idea of whether it was male or female, but it was
tall and dressed in a straight black robe of some rough
harsh material and there was the skin of a dead animal
wrapped about its neck. As he passed, the person, whether
male, or female, motioned to him sharply to lower the shafts i ,
and he did so, and when he stood erect again, dazed at what 1
had befallen him, the person, in broken accents, directed 1
that he was to go to the Street of Bridges. He began to
run hurriedly, scarcely knowing what he did, and once he
called to another puller whom he knew casually in the
day's work:

'Look at this — what is this I pull?'

And the man shouted back at him:

'A foreigner — a female from America — you are rich '

8 9



But Wang Lung ran as fast he could for fear of the
strange creature behind him, and when he reached the Street
of Bridges he was exhausted and dripping with his sweat.

This female stepped out then and said in the same
broken accents, £ You need not have run yourself to death,'
and left him with two silver pieces in his palm, which was
double the usual fare.

rThen Wang Lung knew that this was indeed a foreigner
and more foreign yet than he in this city, and that after
all people of black hair and black eyes are one sort and
people of light hair and light eyes of another sort, and after
that he was no longer wholly foreign in the city.

When he went back to the hut that night with the
silver he had rceived still untouched, he told O-lan, and
she said:

'I have seen them. I always beg of them, for they alone
will drop silver rather than copper into my bowl.'

But neither Wang Lung nor his wife felt that the for-
eigner dropped silver because of any goodness of heart
but rather because of ignorance and not knowing that
copper is more correct to give to beggars than silver.
r ^ Nevertheless, through this experience Wang Lung learned
what the young men had not taught him, that he belonged
to his own kind, who have black hair and black eyes.

Clinging thus to the outskirts of the great, sprawling,
opulent city it seemed that at least there could not be any
lack of food. Wang Lung and his family had come from
a country where if men starve it is because there is no food,
since the land cannot bear under a relentless heaven. Silver
in the hand was worth little because it could buy nothing
where nothing was.

Here in the city there was food everywhere. The cobbled
streets of the fish market were lined with great baskets
of big silver fish, caught in the night out of the teeming
river; with tubs of small shining fish, dipped out of a net
cast over a pool; with heaps of yellow crabs, squirming
and nipping in peevish astonishment; with writhing eels
for gourmands at the feasts. At the grain markets there
were such baskets of grain that a man might step into



90



them and sink and smother and none know it who did
not see it; white rice and brown, and dark yellow wheat
and pale gold wheat, and yellow soy-beans and red beans
and green broad beans, and canary-coloured millet, and
grey sesame. And at Ae meat markets whole hogs hung
by their necks, split open the length of their great bodies
to show the red meat and the layers of goodly fat, the
skin soft and thick and white. And in duck-shops hung,
row upon row, over the ceilings and in the doors, the
brown baked ducks that had been turned slowly on a spit
before coals, and the white salted ducks, and the strings
of duck giblets; and so with the shops that sold geese and
pheasant and every kind of fowl.

As for the vegetables, there was everything which the
hand of man could coax from the soil; glittering red rad-
ishes and white, hollow lotus root and taro, green cab-
bages and celery, curling bean sprouts and brown chestnuts
and garnishes of fragrant, cress. There was nothing which
the appetite of man might desire that was not to be found
upon the streets of the markets of that city. And going
hither and thither were the vendors of sweets and fruits
and nuts and of hot delicacies of sweet potatoes browned
in sweet oils and little delicately spiced balls of pork
wrapped in dough and steamed, and sugar cakes made
from glutinous rice; and the children of the city ran out to
the vendors of these things with their hands full of pennies
and they bought and they ate until their skins glistened
with sugar and oil.

Yes, one would say that in this city there could be
none who starved.

Still, every morning a little after dawn Wang Lung and
his family came out of their hut and with their bowls and
chopsticks they made a small group in a long procession
of people, each issuing from his hut, shivering in clothes too
thin for the damp river fog, w r alking curved against the
chill morning wind in the public kitchens, where for a
penny a man may buy a bowl of thin rice gruel. And with
all Wang Lung's pulling and running before his rickshaw
and with all O-lan's begging, they never could gain enough
to cook rice daily in their own hut. If there was a penny

91



over and above the price of the rice at the kitchens for the
poor, they bought a bit of cabbage. But the cabbage was
dear at any price, for the two boys must go to hunt for fuel
to cook it between the two bricks O-lan had set up for a
stove, and this fuel they had to snatch by handfuls as they
could from the farmers who carried the loads of reed
and grass into the city fuel markets. Sometimes the chil-
dren were caught and cuffed soundly and one night the
elder lad, who was more timid than the younger and more
ashamed of what he did, came back with an eye swollen
shut from the blow of a farmer's hand. But the younger
lad grew adept and indeed more adept at petty thieving
than at begging.

To O-lan this was nothing. If the boys could not beg
without laughing and play, let them steal to fill their bellies.
But Wang Lung, although he had no answer for her, felt
his gorge rise at this thievery of his sons, and he did not
blame the elder when he was slow at the business. The
life in the shadow of the great wall was not the life Wang
Lung loved. There w T as his land waiting for him.

One night he came late and there was in the stew of
cabbage a good round piece of pork. It was the first time
they had had flesh to eat since they killed their own ox,
and Wang Lung's eyes widened.

'You must have begged of a foreigner this day,' he
said to O-lan. But she, according to her habit, said no-
thing. Then the younger boy, too young for wisdom and
filled with his own pride of cleverness, said:

'I took it — it is mine, this meat. When the butcher
looked the other way after he had sliced it off from the big
piece upon the counter, I ran under an old woman's arm
who had come to buy it and I seized it and ran into an
alley and hid in a dry water jar at a back gate until Elder
Brother came.'

'Now will I not eat this meat!' cried Wang Lung angrily.
'We will eat meat that we can buy or beg, but not
that which we steal. Beggars we may be but thieves
we are not.' And he took the meat out of the pot with
his two fingers and threw it upon the ground and was heed-
less of the younger lad's howling*

92



Then O-lan came forward in her stolid fashion and she /
picked up the meat and washed it off with a little water
and thrust it back into the boiling pot.

'Meat is meat,' she said quietly.

Wang Lung said nothing then, but he was angry and"
afraid in his heart because his sons were growing into
thieves here ii\ this city. And although he said nothing
when O-lan pulled the tender cooked flesh apart with her
chopsticks, and although he said nothing when she gave
great pieces of it to the old man and to the boys and even
filled the mouth of the girl with it and ate of it herself, he
himself would have none of it, contenting himself with the
cabbage he had bought. But after the meal was over he
took his younger son into the street out of hearing of the
woman and there behind a house he took the boy's head
under his arm and cuffed it soundly on this side and that,
and would not stop for the lad's bellowing.

'There and there and there!' he shouted. 'That for a
thief!'

But to himself, when he had let the lad go snivelling
home, he said: - .

'We must get back to the land.'



XIII

DAY BY DAY BENEATH THE OPULENCE OF THIS
city Wang Lung lived in the foundations of poverty upon
which it was laid. With the food spilling out of the markets,
with the streets of the silk shops flying brilliant banners of
black and red and orange silk to announce their wares,
With rich men clothed in satin and in velvet, soft-fleshed rich
men with their skin covered with garments of silk and then
hands like flowers of softness, and perfume and the beauty
of idleness, with all of these for the regal beauty of the!
city, in that part where Wang Lung lived there was not
food enough to feed savage hunger, and not clothes enough
to cover bones.



Men laboured all day at the baking of breads and cakes
for feasts for the rich, and children laboured from dawn




95



to midnight and slept all greasy and grimed as they were
upon rough pallets on the floor and staggered to the ovens
next day, and there was not money enough given them
to buy a piece of the rich breads they made for others. And
men and women laboured at the cutting and contriving
of heavy furs for the winter and of soft light furs for the
spring and at the thick brocaded silks, to cut and shape
them into sumptuous robes for the ones who ate of the
profusion at the markets, and they themselves snatched a
bit of coarse blue cotton cloth and sewed it hastily together
to cover their bareness:

Wang Lung, living among these who laboured at feast-
ing others, heard strange things of which he took little heed.
The older men and women, it is true, said nothing to any
one. Greybeards pulled rickshaws, pushed wheelbarrows of
coal and wood to bakeries and palaces, strained their backs
until the muscles stood forth like ropes as they pushed
and pulled the heavy carts of merchandise over the cobbled
roads, ate frugally of their scanty food, slept their brief
nights out, and were silent. Their faces were like the face
of O-lan, inarticulate, dumb. None knew what was in their
minds. If they spoke at all it was of food or of pence.
Rarely was the word silver upon their lips because rarely
was silver in their hands.

Their faces in repose were twisted as though in anger,
only it was not anger. It was the years of straining at loads
too heavy for them which had lifted their upper lips to
bare their teeth in a seeming snarl, and this labour had
set deep wrinkles in the flesh about their eyes and their
mouths. They themselves had no idea of what manner of
men they were. One of them once, seeing himself in a
mirror that passed on a van of household goods had cried
out, 'There is an ugly fellow!' And when others laughed
at him loudly he smiled painfully, never knowing at what
they laughed, and looking about hastily to see if he had
offended some one.

At home in the small hovels where they lived, around
Wang Lung's hovel, heaped one upon another, the women
sewed rags together to make a covering for the children
they were for ever breeding, and they snatched at bits of



94



cabbage from farmer's fields and stole handfuls of rice
from the grain markets, and gleaned the year round ther
grass on the hillsides; and at harvest they followed the
reapers like fowls, their eyes piercing and sharp for every
dropped grain or stalk. And through these huts passed
children; they were^born and dead and born again until
neither mother or fatheFEnew how many had been bom or
had died, and scarcely knew even how many were living,
thinking of them only as mouths to be fed.

These men and these women and these children passed
in and out of the markets and the cloth-shops and wandered
about the countryside that bordered on the city, the men
working at this and that for a few pence, the women and
children stealing and begging and snatching; and Wang
Lung and his woman and his children were among them.

The old men and the old women accepted the life they
had. But there came a time when the male children grew
to a certain age, before they were old when they ceased to
be children, and then they were filled with discontent.
"There was talk among the young men, angry, growling
talk. And later when they were men and married and the
dismay of increasing numbers filled their hearts, the scat-
tered anger of their youth became settled into a fierce
despair and into a revolt too deep for mere words because
all their lives they laboured more severely than beasts,
and for nothing except a handful of refuse to fill their
bellies; Listening to such talk one evening, Wang Lung
heard for the first time what was on the other side of the
great wall to which their rows of huts clung.

It was at the end of one of those days in late winter when
for the first time it seems possible that spring may come
again. The ground about the huts was still muddy with the
melting snow and the water ran into the huts so that each
I family had hunted here and there for a few bricks upon
which to sleep. But with the discomfort of the damp earth
there was this night a soft mildness in the air and this mild-
ness made Wang Lung exceedingly restless, so that after
he had eaten he could not sleep at once as was his wont,
but went out to the street's edge and stood there idle.



9i



Here his old father habitually sat, squatting on his thighs
and leaning against the wall, and here he sat now, having
taken his bowl of food there to sup it, now that the chil-
dren filled the hut to bursting when they were clamouring.
The old man held in one hand the end of a loop of cloth
which O-lan had torn from her girdle, and within this loop
the girl child staggered to and fro without falling. Thus he
spent his days looking after this child who had now grown
rebellious at having to be in her mother's bosom as she
begged. Besides this, O-lan was again with child and the
pressure of the larger child upon her from without was too
painful to bear.

Wang Lung watched the child falling and scrambling
and falling again and the old man pulling at the loop ends,
and standing thus he felt upon his face the mildness of the
evening wind and there arose within him a mighty longing
for his fields.

'On such a day as this,' he said aloud to his father, 'the
fields should be turned and the wheat cultivated.'

'Ah,' said the old man tranquilly. 'I know what is in
your thought. Twice and twice again in my years I have
had to do as we did this year and leave the fields and know
that there was no seed in them for fresh harvests.'

'But you always went back, my father.'

'There was the land, my son,' said the old man simply.

Well, they also would go back, if not this year, then
next, said Wang to his own heart. As long as there was
the land! And the thought of it lying there, waiting for
him, rich with the spring rains, filled him with desire. He
went back to the hut and he said roughly to his wife :

'If I had anything to sell I would sell it and go back
to the land. Or if it were not for the old head, we would
walk though we starved. But how can he and the small
child walk a hundred miles? And you, with your burden!'

O-lan had been rinsing the rice bowls with a little water
and now she piled them in a corner of the hut and looked
up at him from the spot where she squatted.

'There is nothing to sell except the girl,' she answered
slowly.

Wang Lung's breath caught.

9 <S



'Now, I would not sell a child!' he said loudly.

'I was sold,' she answered very slowly. 'I was sold to a
great house so that my parents could return to their home.'

"And would you selLthe child, therefore?'

'If it were only I, she would be killed before she was
sold. . . . the slave of slaves was I ! But a dead girl brings
nothing. I would sell this girl for you — to take you back
to the land.'

'Never would I,' said Wang Lung stoutly, 'not though
I spent my life in this wilderness.'

But when he had gone out again the thought, which
would never spontaneously have come to him, tempted him
against his will. He looked at the small girl, staggering
persistently at the end of the loop her grandfather held.
She had grown greatly on the food given her each day,
and although she had as yet said no word at all, still she
was plump as a child will be on slight care enough. Her
lips that had been like an old woman's were smiling and
red, and as of old she grew merry when he looked at her
and she smiled.

'I might have done it,' he mused, 'if she had not lain in
my bosom and smiled like that.'

And then he thought again of his land and he cried out
passionately:

'Shall I never see it again! With all this labour and beg-
ging there is never enough to do more than feed us to-day.'

Then out of the dusk there answered him a voice, a
deep burly voice:

'You are not the only one. There are a hundred hundred
like you in the city.'

The man came up, smoking a short bamboo pipe, and
it was the father of the family in the hut next but two to
Wang Lung's hut. He was a man seldom seen in the day-
light, for he slept all day and worked at night pulling heavy
wagons of merchandise which were too large for the streets
by day when other vehicles must continually pass each other.
But sometimes Wang Lung saw him come creeping home
at dawn, panting and spent, and his great knotty shoulders
drooping. Wang Lung passed him thus at dawn as he went
out to his own rickshaw-pulling, and sometimes at dusk



5056, 7.



97



before the night's work the man came out and stood with
the other men who were about to go into their hovels to
sleep.

'Well, and is it for ever?' asked Wang Lung bitterly.

The man puffed at his pipe thrice and then spat upon
the ground. Then he said:

'No, and not for ever. When the rich are too rich there
are ways, and when the poor are too poor there are ways.
Last winter we sold two girls and endured, and this win-
ter, if this one my woman bears is a girl, we will sell again.
One slave I have kept— the first. The others it is better to
sell than to kill, although there are those who prefer to kill
them before they draw breath. This is one of the ways [
when the poor are too poor. When the rich are too rich
there is a way, and if I am not mistaken, that way will j
come soon.' He nodded and pointed with the stem of his
pipe to the wall behind them. 'Have you seen inside that
wall?'

Wang Lung shook his head, staring. The man contin- j
ued:

'I took one of my slaves in there to sell and I saw it. !
You would not believe it if I told you how money comes j
and goes in that house. I will tell you this — even the ser- j
ants eat with chopsticks of ivory bound with silver, and
even the slave women hang jade and pearls in their ears !
and sew pearls upon their shoes, and when the shoes have
a bit of mud upon them or a small rent comes such as you
and I would not call a rent, thev throw them away, pearls
and all!'

The man drew hard on his pipe and Wang Lung listened,
his mouth ajar. Over this wall, then, there were indeed such
things !

'There is a way when men are too rich,' said the man, [,
and he was silent for a time and then as though he had I
said nothing he added indifferently : s
'Well, work again,' and was gone into the night. s
But Wang Lung that night could not sleep for thinking j ,
of silver and gold and pearls on the other side of this wall i j,
against which his body rested, his body clad in what he j
wore day after day, because there was no quilt to cover him ^

9 8



and only a mat upon bricks beneath him. And temptation
fell on him again to sell the child, so that he said to himself:
'It would be better^perhaps that she be sold into a rich
house so that she can eat daintily and wear jewels, if it be
that she grow up pretty and please a lord.' But against his
own wish he answered himself and he thought again, 'Well,
and if I did, she is not worth her weight in gold and rubies.
If she bring enough to take us back to the land where will
come enough to buy an ox and a table and a bed and the
benches once more? Shall I sell a child that we may starve
there instead of here? We have not even seed to put into
the land.'

And he saw nothing of the way of which the man spoke
when he said, 'There is a way, when the rich are too rich.'

XIV

SPRING SEETHED IN THE VILLAGE OF HUTS. OUT TO
the hills and the grave lands those who had begged now
could go to dig the small green weeds, dandelions and
shepherd's purse that thrust up feeble new leaves, and it
was not necessary as it had been to snatch at vegetables here
and there. A swarm of ragged women and children issued
forth each day from the huts, and with bits of tin and sharp
stones or worn knives, and with baskets made of twisted
bamboo twigs or split reeds they searched the countrysides
and the roadways for the food they could get without
begging and without money. And every day O-lan went
out with this swarm, O-lan and the two boys.

But men must work, and W'ang Lung worked on as he
had before, although the lengthening warm days and the
sunshine arid sudden rains filled every one with longings
and discontents. In the winter they had worked and been
silent, enduring stolidly the snow and ice under their straw-
sandalled feet, going back at dark to their huts and eating
without words such food as the day's labour and begging
had brought, falling heavily to sleep, men, women and chil-
dren together, to gain that for their bodies which the food
was too poor and too scanty to give. Thus it was in Wang



99



Lung's hut, and well he knew it must be so in every other.

But with the coming of spring talk began to surge up
out of their hearts and to make itself heard on their lips.
In the evening when the twilight lingered they gathered
out of their huts and talked together, and Wang Lung saw
this one and that of the men who had lived near him and
whom through the winter he had not known. Had O-lan
been one to tell him things he might have heard, for in-
stance, of this one who beat his wife, of that one who
had a leprous disease that ate his cheeks out, of that other
who was king of a gang of thieves; but beyond the spare
questions and answers she asked and gave she was silent.
And so Wang Lung stood diffidently on the edge of the
circle and listened to the talk.

Most of these ragged men had nothing beyond what
they took in the day's labour and begging, and he was
always conscious that he was not truly one of them. He
owned land and his land was waiting for him. These others
thought of how they might to-morrow eat a bit of fish, or
of how they might idle a bit, and even how they might
gamble a little, a penny or two, since their days were alike
all evil and filled with want and a man must play sometimes,
though desperate.
r ^ But Wang Lung thought of his land and pondered this
way and that, with the sickened heart of deferred hope,
how he could get back to it.fHe belonged, not to this scum
which clung to the walls of a rich man's house; nor did
he belong to the rich man's house. He belonged to the land
and he could not live with any fullness until he felt the land
under his feet and followed a plough in the spring time
and bore a scythe in his hand at harvest. [He listened, there-
fore, apart from the others, because hidden in his heart was
the knowledge of the possession of his land, the good
wheat land of his fathers, and the strip of rich rice land
which he had bought from the great house.

They talked, these men, always and for ever of money;
of what pence they had paid for a foot of cloth, and of
what they had paid for a small fish as long as a man's fin-
ger, or of what they could earn in a day, and always at
last of what they would do if they had the money which



IOO



the man over the wall had in his coffers. Every day the
talk ended with this :

'And if I hid the gold that he has and the silver in my
hand that he wears every day in his girdle and if I had the
pearls his concubines ^rear-and the rubies his wife wears. .

And listening to all the things which they would do if
they had these things, Wang Lung heard only of how much
they would eat and sleep, and of what dainties they would
eat that they had never yet tasted, and of how they would
gamble in this great tea-shop and in that, and of what
pretty women they would buy for their lust, and, above all,
how none would ever work again, even as the rich man
behind the wall never worked.

Then Wang Lung cried out suddenly:

'If I had the gold and the silver and the jewels, I would
buy land with it, good land, and I would bring forth har-
vests from the land!'

At this they united in turning on him and in rebuking
him.

'Now here is a pig-tailed country bumpkin who under-
stands nothing of city life and of what may be done with
money. He would go on working like a slave behind an
ox or an ass !' And each one of them felt he was more wor-
thy to have the riches than was Wang Lung, because they
knew better how to spend it. •

But this scorn did not change the mind of Wang Lung.
It only made him say to himself instead of aloud for others
to hear:

'Nevertheless, I would put the gold and the silver and
the jewels into good rich lands.'

And thinking this, he grew more impatient every day
for the land that was already his.

Being possessed continually by this thought of his land,
Wang Lung saw as in a dream the things that happened
about him in the city every day. He accepted this strange-
ness and that without questioning why anything was, except
that in this day this thing came. There was, for an example,
the paper that men gave out here and there, and sometimes
even to him.

Now Wang Lung had never in his youth or at any time

IOI



learned the meaning of letters upon paper, and he could
not, therefore, make anything out of such paper covered
with black marks and pasted upon city gates or upon walls
or sold by the handful or even given away. Twice had he
had such paper given him.

[The first time it was given by a foreigner such as the
one he had pulled unwittingly in his rickshaw one day,
only this one who gave him the paper was a man, very
tall, and lean as a tree that has been blown by bitter winds.
This man had eyes as blue as ice and a hairy face, and when
he gave the paper to Wang Lung it was seen that his hands
were also hairy and red-skinned. He had, moreover, a great
nose projecting beyond his cheeks like a prow beyond the
^ sides of a ship and Wang Lung, although frightened to take
anything from his hand, was more frightened to refuse,
seeing the man's strange eyes and fearful nose. He took
what was thrust at him, then, and when he had courage to
look at it after the foreigner had passed on, he saw on the
paper a picture of a man, white-skinned, who hung upon
a cross-piece of wood. The man was without clothes except
for a bit about his loins, and to all appearances he was dead,
since his head dropped upon his shoulder and his eyes were
closed above his bearded lips. Wang Lung looked at the
pictured man in horror and with increasing interest. There
were characters beneath, but of these he could make no-
. thing.

He carried the picture home at night and showed it to
the old man. But he also could not read and they discussed
its possible meaning, Wang Lung and the old man and the
two boys. The two boys cried out in delight and horror:
\ 'And see the blood streaming out of his side!'
And the old man said:

'Surely this was a very evil man to be thus hung.'

But Wang Lung was fearful of the picture and pon-
dered as to why a foreigner had given it to him : whether or
not some brother of this foreigner's had not been so treat-
ed and the other brethren sought revenge. He avoided,
therefore, the street on which he had met the man and
after a few days, when the paper was forgotten, O-lan took
it and sewed it into a shoe sole together with other bits of



102



paper she picked up here and there to make the soles firm.

But the next time one handed a paper freely to Wang
Lung it was a man of the city, a young man well clothed,
who talked loudly as he^disffibuted sheets hither and thither
among the crowds who swarm about anything new and
strange in a street. This paper bore also a picture of blood
and death, but the man who died this time was not white-
skinned and hairy but a man like Wang Lung himself, a
common fellow, yellow and slight and black of hair and
eye and clothed in ragged blue garments. Upon the dead
figure a great fat one stood and stabbed the dead figure
again and again with a long knife he held. It was a piteous
sight and Wang Lung stared at it and longed to make
something of the letters underneath. He turned to the man
beside him and he said:

'Do you know a character or two so that you may tell
me the meaning of this dreadful thing?'

And the man said:

'Be still and listen to the young teacher; he tells us all.'

And so Wang Lutlg listened, and what he heard was
what he had never heard before.

'The dead man is yourselves,' proclaimed the young
teacher, 'and the murderous one who stabs you when you
are dead and do not know it are the rich and the capitalists,
who would stab you even after you are dead. You are
poor and down-trodden and it is because the rich seize
everything.'

Now, Wang Lung knew full well he had heretofore
blamed it that he was poor on a heaven that would not
rain in its season, or, having rained, would continue to
rain as though rain were an evil habit. When there was rain
and sun in proportion so that the seed would sprout in the
land and the stalk bear grain, he did not consider himself
poor. Therefore he listened in interest to hear further wham,
the rich man had to do with this thing, that heaven would
not rain in its season. And at last when the young man
had talked on and on but said nothing of this matter where
Wang Lung's interest lay, Wang Lung grew bold and asked :

'Sir, is there any way whereby the rich who oppress us
can make it rain so that I can work on the land?'



103



At this the young man turned on him with scorn and
replied :

'Now how ignorant you are, you who still wear your
hair in a long tail I No one can make it rain when it will
not, but what has this to do with us? If the rich would
share with us what they have, rain or not would matter to
none, because we would all have money and food.'

A great shout went up from those who listened, but
Wang Lung turned away unsatisfied. Yes, but there was
the land. Money and food are eaten and gone, and if there
is not sun and rain in proportion, there is again hunger.
Nevertheless, he took willingly the papers the young man
gave him, because he remembered that O-lan had never
enough paper for the shoe soles-, and so he gave them to
her when he went home, saying:

'Now there is some stuff for the shoe soles,' and he
worked as before.

But of the men in the huts with whom he talked at eve-
ning there were many who heard eagerly what the young
man said, the more eagerly because they knew that over
the wall there dwelt a rich man and it seemed a small thing
that between them and his riches there was only this layer
of bricks, which might be torn down with a few knocks
of a stout pole, such as they had, to carry their heavy bur-
dens every day upon their shoulders.

And to the discontent of the spring there was now add-
ed the new discontent which the young man and others
like him spread abroad in the spirits of the dwellers in the
huts, the sense of unjust possession by others of those
things which they had not. And as they thought day after
day on all these matters and talked of them in the twilight,
and above all as day after day their labour brought in no
added wage, there arose in the hearts of the young and the
strong a tide as irresistible as the tide of the river swollen
with winter snows — the tide of the fullness of savage
desire.

But Wang Lung, although he saw this and heard the
talk and felt their anger with a strange unease, desired
nothing but his land under his feet again.

104



i Then in this city out of which something new was al-^
ways springing at him, Wang Lung saw another new thing
he did not understand. He saw one day, when, looking fof j
a customer, he gulled his rickshaw empty down a street i
a man seized as he sto^d by a small band of armed soldiers, 1
and when the man protested, the soldiers brandished knives \
in his face, and while Wang Lung watched in amazement,
another was seized and another, and it came to Wang Lung
that those who were seized were all common fellows who
worked with their hands, and while he stared, yet another
man was seized, and this one a man who lived in the hut
nearest his own against the wall.

Then Wang Lung perceived suddenly out of his astonish-
ment that all these men seized were as ignorant as he as
to why they were thus being taken, willy-nilly, whether they
would or not. And Wang Lung thrust his rickshaw into a
side alley and he dropped it and darted into the door of a
hot- water shop lest he be next and there he hid, crouched
low behind the great cauldrons, until the soldiers passed.
And then he asked the keeper of the hot- water shop the
meaning of the thing he had seen, and the man, who was
old and shrivelled with the steam rising continually about
him out of the copper cauldrons of his trade, answered with
indifference :

'It is but another war somewhere. Who knows what
all this fighting to and fro is about? But so it has been since
I was a lad and so will it be after I am dead and well I
know it.'

'Well, and but why do they seize my neighbour, who is
as innocent as I who have never heard of this new war?'
asked Wang Lung in great consternation. And the old man
clattered the lids of his cauldrons and answered :

'These soldiers are going to battle somewhere and they
need carriers for their bedding and their guns and their
ammunition and so they force labourers like you to do it.
But what part are you from? It is no new sight in this
city.'

'But what then?' urged Wang Lung breathless. 'What

wage — what return '

Now the old man was very old and he had no great

105



hope in anything and no interest in anything beyond his
cauldrons and he answered carelessly:

'Wage there is none and but two bits of dry bread a
day and a sup from a pond, and you may go home when
the destination is reached if your two legs can carry you.'

'Well, but a man's family ' said Wang Lung, aghast.

c Well, and what do they know or care of that?' said the
old man scornfully, peering under the wooden lid of the
nearest cauldron to see if the water bubbled yet. A cloud
of steam enveloped him and his wrinkled face could scarce-
ly be seen peering into the cauldron. Nevertheless he was
kindly, for when he came forth again out of the steam he
saw what Wang Lung could not see from where he crouch-
ed, that once more the soldiers approached, searching the
streets from which now every able-bodied working man
had fled.

'Stoop yet more,' he said to Wang Lung. 'They are come
again..'

And Wang Lung crouched low behind the cauldrons
and the soldiers clattered down the cobbles to the west,
and when the sound of their leathern boots was gone Wang
Lung darted out and seizing his rickshaw he ran with it
empty to the hut.

Then to O-lan, who had but just returned from the road-
side to cook a little of the green stuff she had gathered,
he told in broken, panting words what was happening and
how nearly he had not escaped, and as he spoke this new
horror sprang up in him — that he be dragged to battle-
fields, and that not only his old father and his family be
left alone to starve, but that he be slain upon a battlefield
and his blood be spilled out, and he nevermore be able to
see his own land. He looked at O-lan haggardly and he
said :

,r 'Now am I truly tempted to sell the little slave and go
north to the land.'

But she, after listening, mused and said in her plain
and unmoved way:

'Wait a few days. There is strange talk about.'

Nevertheless, he went out no more in the daylight, but
he sent the eldest lad to return the rickshaw to the place

106



from where he hired it and he waited until the night came
and he went to the houses of merchandise and for half
what he had earned before he pulled all night the great
wagon-loads of boxesv<to each wagon a dozen men pulling
and straining and groaning. And the boxes were filled with
silks and with cottons and with fragrant tobacco, so fragrant
that the smell of it leaked through the wood. And there
were great jars of oils and of wines.

All night through the dark streets he strained against
the ropes, his body naked and streaming with sweat, his
bare feet slipping on the cobbles, slimy and wet as they
were with dampness of the night. Before them to show
the way ran a little lad carrying a flaming torch and in the
light of this torch the faces and the bodies of the men and
the wet stones glistened alike. And Wang Lung came home
before dawn, gasping and too broken for food until he had
slept. But during the bright day when the soldiers searched
the street he slept safely in the furthermost corner of the
hut behind a pile of straw O-lan gathered to make a shield
for him.

What battles there were or who fought which other one
Wang Lung did not know. But with the further coming of
spring the city became filled with the unrest of fear. All
during the days carriages drawn by horses pulled rich men
and their possessions of clothing and satin-covered bedding
and their beautiful women and their jewels to the river's
edge where ships carried them away to other places, and
some went to that other house where fire- wagons came and
went. Wang Lung never went upon the streets in the day,
but his sons came back with their eyes wide and bright,
crying :

'We saw such an one and such an one, a man as fat and
monstrous as a god in a temple, and his body covered with
many feet of yellow silk and on his thumb a great gold ring
set with green stone like a piece of glass, and his flesh was
all bright with oil and eating!'

Or the elder cried.

'And we have seen such boxes and boxes and when I
asked what was in them one said: 'There is gold and silver
in them, but the rich cannot take all they have away, and

107



some day it will all be ours.' Now, what did he mean by
this, my father?' And the lad opened his eyes inquisitivily
to his father.

But when Wang Lung answered shortly: 'How should
I know what an idle city fellow means?' the lad cried wist-
fully:

'Oh, I wish we might go even now and get it if it is
ours. I should like to taste a cake. I have never tasted a
sweet cake with sesame seed sprinkled on the top.'

The old man looked up from his dreaming at this and
he said as one croons to himself:

'When we had a good harvest w r e had such cakes at
the autumn feast, when the sesame had been threshed and
before it was sold we kept a little back to make such cakes.'

And Wang Lung remembered the cakes that O-lan had
once made at the New Year's feast, cakes of rice-flour and
lard and sugar, and his mouth watered and his heart pained
him with longing for that which was passed.

'If we were only back on our land,' he muttered.

Then suddenly it seemed to him that not one more day
could he lie in this wretched hut, which was not wide enough
for him even to stretch his length in behind the pile of
straw, nor could he another night strain the hours through,
his body bent against a rope cutting into his flesh, and
dragging the load over the cobble stones. Each stone he
had come to know now as a separate enemy, and he knew
each rut by which he might evade a stone and so use an
ounce less of his life. There were times in the black nights,
especially when it rained and the streets were wet and more
wet than usual, that the whole hatred of his heart went out
against these stones under his feet, these stones that seemed
to cling and to hang to the wheels of his inhuman load.

'Ah, the fair land!' he cried out suddenly and fell [to
weeping so that the children were frightened and the old
man, looking at his son in consternation, twisted his face
this way and that under his sparse beard, as a child's face
twists when he sees his mother weep.

And again it was O-lan who said in her flat, plain voice:

'Yet a little while and we shall see a thing. There is talk
everywhere now.'

108



From his hut where Wang Lung lay hid he heard hour
after hour the passing of feet, the feet of soldiers marching
to battle. Lifting sometimes a very little the mat which
stood between thern and him, he put one eye to the crack
and he saw these feet^assing, passing, leather shoes and
cloth covered legs, marching one after the other, pair by
pair, score upon score, thousands upon thousands. In the
night when he was at his load he saw their faces flickering
past him, caught for an instant out of the darkness by the
flaming torch ahead. He dared ask nothing concerning
them, but he dragged his load doggedly, and he ate hastily
his bowl of rice, and slept the day fitfully through in the
hut behind the straw. None spoke in those days to any
other. The city was shaken with fear and each man did
quickly what he had to do and went into his house and
shut the door.

About the huts there was no more idle talk at twilight.
In the market places the stalls where food had been were
now empty. The silk shops drew in their bright banners
and closed the fronts of their great shops with thick boards
fitting one into the other solidly, so that passing through
the city at noon it was as though the people slept.

It was whispered everywhere that the enemy approached,
and all those who owned anything were afraid. But Wang
Lung was not afraid, neither were the dwellers in the huts
afraid. They did not know, for one thing, who this enemy
was, nor had they anything to lose since even their lives
were no great loss. If this enemy approached, let him ap-
proach; seeing that nothing could be worse than it now
was with them. But every man went on his own way and
none spoke openly to any other.

Then the managers of the houses of merchandise told
the labourers who pulled the boxes to and fro from the
river's edge that they need come no more, since there were
none to buy and sell in these days at the counters, and so
Wang Lung stayed in his hut day and night and was idle.
At first he was glad, for it seemed his body could never
get enough rest and he slept as heavily as a man dead.
But if he did not work neither did he earn, and in a few
short days what they had of extra pence was gone and

109



again he cast about desperately as to what he could do.
And as if there were not enough evil befallen them, the
public kitchens closed their doors and those who had in
this way provided for the poor went into their own houses
and shut the doors, and there was no food and no work
and no one passing upon the streets of whom any one
could beg.

Then Wang Lung took his girl child into his arms and
he sat with her in the hut and he looked at her and said
softly :

'Little fool, would you like to go to a great house where
there is food and drink and where you may have a whole
coat to your body?'

Then she smiled, not understanding anything of what
he said, and put up her small hand to touch with wonder
his staring eyes and he could not bear it and he cried out
Vo the woman:

\ 'Tell me, and were you beaten in that great house?'
1 And she answered him flatly and sombrely:
[ 'Every day I was beaten.'

And he cried again :
| 'But was it just with a girdle of cloth or was it with bam-
/boo or rope?'

And she answered in the same dead way :

'I was beaten with a leather thong which had been halter
for one of the mules, and it hung upon the kitchen wall.'

Well he knew that she understood what he was think-
ing, but he put forth his last hope and he said :

'This child of ours is a pretty little maid, even now.
Tell me, were the pretty slaves beaten also?'

And she answered indifferently, as though it were no-
thing to her this way or that:

'Aye, beaten or carried to a man's bed, as the whim was,
and not to one man's only but to any that might desire
her that night, and the young lords bickered and bartered
with each other for this slave or that and said, 'Then if
you to-night, I to-morrow,' and when they were all alike
wearied of a slave the men servants bickered and bartered
for what the young lords left; and this before a slave was
out of childhood — if she were pretty.'

no



Then Wang Lung groaned and held the child to him
and said over and over to her softly, 'Oh, little fool — oh,
poor little fool. ' But within himself he was crying as a
man cries out when he is caught in a rushing flood and
cannot stop to think. 'There is no other way — there is no

other way '

Then suddenly asTSTSat^there came a noise like the crack-
ing of heaven and every one of them fell unthinking on
the ground and hid their faces, for it seemed as though the
hideous roar would catch them all up and crush them.
And Wang Lung covered the girl child's face with his hand,
not knowing what horror might appear to them out of
this dreadful din, and the old man called out into Wang
Lung's ear, 'Now this I have never heard before in all my
years,' and the two boys yelled with fear.

But O-lan, when silence had fallen as suddenly as it
had gone, lifted her head and said, 'Now that which I
have heard of has come to pass. The enemy has broken
in the gates of the city.' And before any could answer her
there was a shout over the city, a rising shout of human
voices, at first faint, as one may hear the wind of a storm
approaching, then gathering in a deep howl, louder and
more loud till it filled the streets.

Wang Lung sat erect then, on the floor of his hut, and
a strange fear crept over his flesh, so that he felt it stirring
among the roots of his hair, and every one sat erect and
they all stared at each other waiting for something they
knew not. But there was only the noise of the gathering
of human beings and each man howling.

Then over the wall and not far from them they heard
the sound of a great door creaking upon its hinges and
groaning as it opened unwillingly, and suddenly the man
who had talked to Wang Lung once at dusk asjd smoked
a short bamboo pipe, thrust his head in at the hut's open-
ing and cried out: ^
'Now do you still sit here? The hour has come — the
gates of the rich man are open to us!' And as if by magic
of some kind O-lan was gone, creeping out under the man's
arm as he spoke.

Then Wang Lung rose up, slowly and half dazed, and



he set the girl child down and he went out and there before
the great iron gates of the rich man's house a multitude of
clamouring common people pressed forward, howling
together the deep, tigerish howl that he had heard rising
and swelling out of the streets, and he knew that at the
gates of all rich men there pressed this howling multitude
of men and women who had been starved and imprisoned
and now were for the moment free to do as they would.
And the great gates were ajar and the people pressed for-
ward so tightly packed together that foot was on foot and
body wedged tightly against body so that the whole mass
moved together as one. Others hurrying from the back
caught Wang Lung and forced him into the crowd so that
whether he would or not he was taken forward with them,
although he did not himself know what his will was, be-
cause he was so amazed at what had come about.

Thus was he swept along over the threshold of the great
gates, his feet scarcely touching the ground in the pressure
of people, and like the continuous roar of angry beasts
there went on all around the howling of the people.

Through court after court he was swept, into the very
inner courts, and of those men and women who had lived
in the house he saw not one. It was as though here were
a palace long dead except that early lilies bloomed among
the rocks of the gardens and the golden flowers of the
early trees of spring blossomed upon bare branches. But
in the rooms food stood upon a table and in the kitchens
fire burned. Well this crowd knew th^ courts of the rich
for they swept past the front courts, where servants and
slaves lived and where the kitchens are, into the inner
courts, where the lords and ladies have their dainty beds
and where stand their lacquered boxes of black and red
and gold, their boxes of silken clothing, where carved ta-
bles and chairs are, and upon the walls painted scrolls.
And upon these treasures the crowd fell, seizing at and
tearing from each other what was revealed in every newly
opened box or closet, so that clothing and bedding and
curtains and dishes passed from hands to hand, each hand
snatching that which another held, and none stopping to
see what he had.



Only Wang Lung in the confusion took nothing. He
had never in all his life taken what belonged to another,
and not at once could he do it. So he stood in the middle
of the crowd at first, dragged this way and that, and then
coming somewhat to his senses, he pushed with persever-
ance toward the edge-a^K^found himself at last on the fringe
of the multitude, and here She stood, swept along slightly
as little whirlpools are at the edge of a pool of current;
but still he was able to see where he was.

He was at the back of the innermost court where the
ladies of the rich dwell, and the back gate was ajar, that gate
which the rich have for centuries kept for their escape in
such times, and therefore called the gate of peace. Through
this gate doubtless they had all escaped this day and were
hidden here and there through the streets, listening to the
howling in their courts. But one man, whether because of
his size or whether because of his drunken heaviness of
sleep, had failed to escape, and this one Wang Lung came
upon suddenly in an empty inner room from whence the
mob had swept in and out again, so that the man, who
had been hidden in a secret place, had not been found, and
now, thinking he was alone, crept out to escape. And thus
Wang Lung, always drifting away from the others until
he too was alone, came upon him, ^
He was a great fat fellow, neither old nor young, and /
he had been lying naked in his bed, doubtless with a pretty
woman, for his naked body gaped through a purple satin
robe he held about bim. The great yellow rolls of his flesh
doubled over his breasts and over his belly and in the moun-
tains of his cheeks his eyes were small and sunken as a pig's
eyes. When he saw Wang Lung he shook all over and yelled
out as though his flesh had been stuck with a knife, so that
Wang Lung, weaponless as he was, wondered and could
have laughed at the sight. But the fat fellow fell upon his
knees and knocked his head on the tiles of the floor and
he cried forth:

'Save a life — save a life — do not kill me. I have money
for you — much money.'

It was this word "money" which suddenly brought to
Wang Lung's mind a piercing clarity. Money! Aye, and

5056, 8.



he needed that! And again it came to him clearly, as a
voice speaking. 'Money — the child saved — the land!'

He cried out suddenly in a harsh voice such as he did
not himself know was in his breast :

'Give me the *noney then!'

And the fat man rose to his knees, sobbing and gibber-
ing and feeling for the pocket of the robe, and he brought
forth his yellow hands dripping with gold, and Wang Lung
held out the end of his coat and received it. And again he
cried out in that strange voice that was like another man's :

'Give me more!'

And again the man's hands came forth dripping with
gold and he whimpered:

'Now there is none left and I have nothing but my
wretched life,' and he fell to weeping, his tears running
like oil down his hanging cheeks.

Wang Lung, looking at him as he shivered and wept,
suddenly loathed him as he had loathed nothing in his life
and he cried out with the loathing surging up in him:

'Out of my sight, lest I kill you for a fat worm!"

This Wang Lung cried, although he was a man so soft-
hearted that he could not kill an ox. And the man ran
past him like a cur and was gone.

Then Wang Lung was. left alone with the gold. He
did not stop to count it, but thrust it into his bosom and
went out of the open gate of peace and across the small
back streets to his hut. He hugged to his bosom the gold
that was yet warm from the other man's body and to him-
self he said over and over :

'We go back to the land — to-morrow we go back to
the land!'

XV

BEFORE A HANDFUL OF DAYS HAD PASSED IT SEEM-
ed to Wang Lung that he had never been away from
his land, as indeed, in his heart he never had. With three
pieces of the gold he bought good seed from the south,
full grains of wheat and of rice and of corn, and for very



114



recklessness of riches he bought seeds the like of which he
had never planted before, celery and lotus for his pond
and great red radishes that are stewed with pork for a
feast dish and smallr^ed-f^agrant beans.

With five gold pieces he bought an ox from a farmer
ploughing in the field, and this before ever he reached his
own land. He saw the man ploughing and he stopped and
they all stopped, the old man and the children and the
woman, eager as they were to reach the house and the
land, and they looked at the ox. Wang Lung had been
struck with its great strong neck and noticed at once the
sturdy pulling of its shoulder against the wooden yoke
and he called out:

'That is a worthless ox! What will you sell it for in
silver or gold, seeing that I have no animal and am hard
put to it and willing to take anything?'

And the farmer called back:

C I would sooner sell my wife than this ox which is but
three years old and in its prime,' and he ploughed on and
would not stop for Wang Lung.

Then it seemed to Wang Lung as if out of all the oxen
the world held he must have this one, and he said to O-lan
and to his father:

"How is it for an ox?'

And the old man peered and said, c It seems a beast
well castrated.'

And O-lan said, 'It is a year older than he says.'

But Wang Lung answered nothing because upon this
ox he had set his heart because of its sturdy pulling of the
soil and because of its smooth yellow coat and its full, dark
eye. With this ox he could plough his fields and cultivate
them, and with this ox tied to his mill he could grind the
grain. And he went to the farmer and said:

'I will give you enough to buy another ox and more,
but this ox I will have.'

At last after bickering and quarrelling and false starts
away the farmer yielded for half again the worth of an ox
in those parts. But gold w T as suddenly nothing to Wang
Lung when he looked at this ox, and he passed it over to
the farmer's hand and he watched while the farmer unyoked



"5



the beast, and Wang Lung led it away with a rope through
its nostrils, his heart burning with his possession.

When they reached the house they found the door torn
away and the thatch from the roof gone and within their
hoes and rakes that they had left were gone, so only the
bare rafters and the earthen walls remained, and even the
earthen walls were worn down with the belated snows and
the rains of winter and early spring. But after the first
astonishment all this was as nothing to Wang Lung. He
went away to the town and he bought a good new plough
of hard wood and two rakes and two hoes and mats to
cover the roof until they could grow thatch again from the
harvest.

Then in the evening he stood in the doorway of his
house and looked across the land, his own land, lying
loose and fresh from the winter's freezing, and ready for
planting. It was full spring and in the shallow pool the
frogs croaked drowsily. The bamboos at the corner of the
house swayed slowly under a gentle night wind and through
the twilight he could see dimly the fringe of trees at the
border of the near field. They were peach trees, budded
most delicately pink,and willow trees thrusting forth tender
green leaves. And up from the quiescent, waiting land a
faint mist rose, silver as moonlight, and clung about the
tree trunks.

At first and for a long time it seemed to Wang Lung
that he wished to see no human being but only to be
alone on his land. He went to no houses of the village,
and when his neighbours came to him — those who were
left of the winter's starving — he was surly with them.

'Which of you tore away my door and which of you
have my rake and my hoe and which of you burned my
roof in his oven?' Thus he bawled at them.

And they shook their heads, full of virtue; and this
one said, 'It was your uncle,' and that one said, 'Nay,
with bandits and robbers roving over the land in these evil
times of famine and war, how can it be said that this one
or that stole anything? Hunger makes thief of any man.'

Then Ching, his neighbour, came creeping forth from
his house to see Wang Lung and he said:

1x6



'Through the winter a band of robbers lived in your
house and preyed ujDon the village and the town as they /
were able. Your uncle, it is said, knows more of them
than an honest man should. But who knows what is true
in these days? I would not dare to accuse any man.'

This man was nothing but a shadow indeed, so close
did his skin stick to his bones and so thin and grey had
his hair grown, although he had not yet reached forty-five
years of his age. Wang Lung stared at him awhile and
then in compassion he said suddenly:

'Now you have fared worse than we and what have
you eaten?'

And the man sighed forth in a whisper:

'What have I not eaten? Offal from the streets like
dogs, when we begged in the town, and dead dogs we ate, '
and once before she died my woman brewed some soup
from flesh I dared not ask what it was, except that I knew
she had not the courage to kill; and if we ate it was some-
thing she found. Then she died, having less strength than j
I to endure, and after she died I gave the girl to a soldier
because I could not see her starve and die also.' He paused
and fell silent and after a time he said$ 'If I had a little seed I '
I would plant once more, but no seed have I.'

'Come here!' cried Wang Lung roughly and dragged
him into the house by the hand and he bade the man hold
up the ragged tail of his coat and into it Wang Lung
poured from the store of seed he had brought from the
south. Wheat he gave him and rice and cabbage seed and
he said:

'To-morrow I will come and plough your land with my \j
good ox.'

Then Ching began to weep suddenly and Wang Lung
rubbed his own eyes and cried out as if he were angry,
'Do you think I have forgotten that you gave me that '
handful of beans ?' But Ching could answer nothing, only
he walked away weeping and weeping without stop.

It was joy to Wang Lung to find that his uncle was no
longer in the village; and where he was none knew certainly.
Some said he had gone to a city and some said he was in
far distant parts with his wife and his son. But there was



not one left in his house in the village. The girls, and this
Wang Lung heard v/ith stout anger, were sold, the prettiest
first, for the price they could bring, but even the last one,
who was pock-marked, was sold for a handful of pence to
a soldier who was passing through to battle.

Then Wang Lung set himself robustly to the soil and
he begrudged even the hours he must spend in the house
for food and sleep. He loved rather to take his roll of
bread and garlic to the field and stand there eating, planning
and thinking. 'Here shall I put the black-eyed peas and
here the young rice beds.' And if he grew too weary in
I the day he laid himself into a furrow, and there, with the
good warmth of his own land against , his flesh, he slept.

And O-lan in the house was not idle. With her own
hands she lashed the mats firmly to the rafters and took
earth from the fields and mixed it with water and mended
the walls of the house, and she built again the oven and
filled the holes in the floor that the rain had washed.

Then she went into the town one day with Wang Lung
and together they bought beds and a table and six benches
and a great iron cauldron and then they bought for pleasure
a red clay teapot with a black flower marked on it in ink,
j and six bowls to match. Last of all they went into an
incense shop and bought a paper god of wealth to hang on
the wall over the table in the middle room, and they bought
two pewter candlesticks and a pewter incense-urn and two
red candles to burn before the god, thick red candles of
cow's fat and having a slender reed through the middle
for wick.

And with this, Wang Lung thought of the two small
gods in the temple to the earth and on his way home he
went and peered in at them, and they were piteous to
behold, their features washed from their faces with rain
and the clay of their bodies naked and sticking through
the tatters of their paper clothes. None had paid any heed
to them in this dreadful year and Wang Lung looked at
them grimly and with content and he said aloud, as one
might speak to a punished child:

'Thus it is with gods who do evil to men!'

Nevertheless, when the house was itself again, and the

xi8



pewter candlesticks gleaming and the candles burning in
them shining red, ancTthe teapot and the bowls upon the
table and the beds in their places with a little bedding
once more, and fresh paper pasted over the hole in the
room where he slept and a new door hung upon its wooden
hinges, Wang Lung was afraid of his happiness. O-lan
grew great with the next child; his children tumbled like
brown puppies about his threshold and against the southern
wall his old father sat and dozed and smiled as he slept;
in his fields the young rice sprouted as green as jade and
more beautiful, and the young beans lifted their hooded
heads from the soil. And out of the gold there was still
enough left to feed them until the harvest, if they ate
sparingly. Looking at the blue heaven above him and the
white clouds driving across it, feeling upon his ploughed
fields as upon his own flesh the sun and rain in proportion,
Wang Lung muttered unwillingly:

'I must stick a little incense before those two in the
small temple. After all, they have power over earth.'

XVI

ONE NIGHT AS WANG LUNG LAY WITH HIS WIFE HE
felt a hard lump the size of a man's closed hand between
her breasts and he said to her:

'Now what is this thing you have on your body?'

He put his hand to it and he found a cloth-wrapped
bundle that was hard yet moved to his touch. She drew
back violently at first and then when he laid hold of it to
pluck it away from her she yielded and said:

'Well, look at it then, if you must,' and she took the
string which held it to her neck and broke it and gave
him the thing.

It was wrapped in a bit of rag and he tore this away.
Then suddenly into his hand fell a mass of jewels. Wang
Lung gazed at them stupefied. There were such a mass
of jewels as one had never dreamed could be together,
jewels red as the inner flesh of watermelons, golden as
wheat, green as young leaves in spring, clear as water

119



trickling out of the earth. What the names of them were
Wang did not know, having never heard names and seen
jewels together in his life. But holding them there in his
hand, in the hollow of his brown hard hand, he knew from
the gleaming and the glittering in the half-dark room that
he held wealth. He held it motionless, drunk with colour
and shape, speechless, and together he and the woman
stared at what he held. At last he whispered to her, breathless :

'Where— where 9

And she whispered back as softly:

'In the rich man's house. It must have been a favourite's
treasure. I saw a brick loosened in the wall and I slipped
there carelessly so no other soul could see and demand a
share. I pulled the brick away, caught the shining, and put
them into my sleeve.'

'Now how did you know?' he whispered again, filled
with admiration, and she answered with the smile on her
lips that was never in her eyes :

'Do you think I have not lived in a rich man's house?
The rich are always afraid. I saw robbers in a bad year
once rush into the gate of the great house and the slaves
and the concubines and even the Old Mistress herself ran
hither and thither and each had a treasure that she thrust
into some secret place already planned. Therefore I knew
the meaning of a loosened brick.'

And again they fell silent, staring at the wonder of the
stones. Then after a long time Wang Lung drew in his
breath and said resolutely:

'Now treasure like this one cannot keep. It must be
sold and put into safety — into land, for nothing else is safe.
If any knew of this we should be dead by the next day
and a robber would carry the jewels. They must be put
into land this very day or I shall not sleep to-night.'

He wrapped the stones in the rag again as he spoke
and tied them hard together with the string, and opening
his coat to thrust them into his bosom, by chance he saw
the woman's face. She was sitting cross-legged upon the
bed at its foot and her heavy face that never spoke of
anything was moved with a dim yearning of open lips and
face thrust forward.



1 20



'Well, and now what?' he asked, wondering at her.

'Will you sell them all?' she asked in a hoarse whisper.

'And why not then?' he answered, astonished. 'Why
should we have jewels like this in an earthen house?'

'I wish I could keep two for myself,' she said with such
helpless wistfulness, as of one expecting nothing, that he
**was moved as he might be by one of his children longing
for a toy or for a sweet.

'Well, now!' he cried in amazement.

'If I could have two,' she went on humbly, 'only two
small ones — the two small white pearls even . . .'

'Pearls!' he repeated, agape.

'I would keep them — I would not wear them,' she said,
'only keep them.' And she dropped her eyes and fell to
twisting a bit of the bedding where a thread was loosened,
and she waited patiently as one who scarcely expects an
answer.

Then Wang Lung, without comprehending it, looked j
for an instant into the heart of this dull and faithful creature, j
who had laboured all her life at tasks for which she won j
no reward and who in the great house had seen others
wearing jewels that she never once even felt in her hand. ■

'I could hold them in my hand sometimes,' she added,
as if she thought to herself.

And he was moved by something he did not under-
stand and he pulled the jewels from his bosom and unwrap-
ped them and handed them to her in silence, and she searched
among the glittering colours, her hard brown hand turning
over the stones delicately and lingeringly until she found
the two smooth white pearls, and these she took, and tying
up the others again, she gave them back to him. Then
she took the pearls and she tore a bit of the corner of her
coat away and wrapped them and hid them between her
breasts and was comforted.

But Wang Lung watched her astonished and only half
understanding, so that afterwards during the day and on
other days he would stop and stare at her and say to
himself :

'Well now, that woman of mine, she has those two
pearls between her breasts still, I suppose.' But he never



121



saw her take them out or look at them and they never
spoke of them at all.

As for the other jewels, he pondered this way and that,
and at last he decided he would go to the great house and
see if there were more land to buy.

To the great house he now went, and there was in
these days no gateman standing at the gate, twisting the
long hairs of his mole, scornful of those who could not
enter past him into the House of Hwang. Instead the great
gates were locked and Wang Lung pounded against them
with both fists and no one came. Men who passed in the
streets looked up and cried out at him;

'Aye, you may pound now and pound again. If the
Old Lord is awake he may come and if there is a stray
dog of a slave about she may open, if she is inclined to it.'

But at last he heard slow footsteps coming across the
threshold, slow wandering footsteps that halted and came
on by fits, and then he heard the slow drawing of the
iron bar that held the gate and the gate creaked and a
cracked voice whispered:

'Who is it?'

Then Wan Lung answered loudly, although he was
amazed :

'It is I, Wang Lung!'

Then the voice said peevishly:

'Now who is an accursed Wang Lung?'

And Wang Lung perceived by the quality of the curse
that it was the Old Lord himself, because he cursed as
one accustomed to servants and slaves. Wang Lung an-
swered, therefore, more humbly than before:

'Sir and lord, I am come on a little business, not to
disturb your lordship, but to talk a little business with the
agent who serves your honour.'

Then the Old Lord answered without opening any wider
the crack through which he pursed his lips:

'Now curse him, that dog left me many months ago
and he is not here.'

Wang Lung did not know what to do after this reply.
It was impossible to talk of buying land directly to the
Old Lord, without a middleman, and yet the jewels hung

122



in his bosom hot as fire, and he wanted to be rid of them
and more than that he wanted the land. With the seed
he could plant as much land again as he had, and he wanted
the good land of the House of Hwang.

'I came about a little money,' he said hesitatingly.

At once the Old Lord pushed the gates together.

'There is no money in this house,' he said more loudly
than he bad yet spoken. 'The thief and robber of an agent —
and may his mother and his mother's mother be cursed
for himi — took all that I had. No debts can be paid.'

'No — no/ called Wang Lung hastily, 'I came to pay
out, not to collect debt.'

At this there was a shrill scream from a voice Wang
Lung had not yet heard and a woman thrust her face
suddenly out of the gates.

'Now that is a thing I have not heard for a long time,'
she said sharply, and Wang Lung saw a handsome, shrewish,
high-coloured face looking out at him. 'Come in,' she said
briskly and she opened the gates wide enough to admit
him and then behind his back, while he stood astonished
in the court, she barred them securely again.

The Old Lord stood there coughing and staring, a dirty
grey satin robe wrapped about him, from which hung
an edge of bedraggled fur. Once it had been a fine gar-
ment, as any one could see, for the satin was still heavy
and smooth, although stains and spots covered it, and it
was wrinkled as though it had been used as a bedgown.
Wang Lung stared back at the Old Lord, curious, yet half-
afraid, because all his life he had half feared the people
in the great house; and it seemed impossible that the Old
Lord, of whom he had heard so much, was this old figure,
no more dreadful than his old father, and indeed less so,
for his father was a cleanly and smiling old man, and the
Old Lord, who had been fat, was now lean, and his skin
hung in folds about him and he was unwashed and unshaven
and his hand was yellow and trembled as he passed it
over his chin and pulled at his loose old lips.

The woman was clean enough. She had a hard, sharp
face, handsome with a sort of hawk's beauty of high
bridged nose and keen bright black eyes and pale skin



stretched too tightly over her bones, and her cheeks and
lips were red and hard. Her black hair was like a mirror
for smooth shining blackness, but from her speech one
could perceive she was not of the lord's family, but a
slave, sharp-voiced and bitter-tongued. And beside these
two, the woman and the Old Lord, there was not another
person in the court where before men and women and
children had run to and fro on their business of caring for
the great house.

'Now about money,' said the woman sharply. But Wang
Lung hesitated. He could not well speak before the Old
Lord and this the woman instantly perceived as she per-
ceived everything more quickly than speech could be made
about it, and she said to the old man shrilly, 'Now off
with you!'

And the aged lord, without a word, shambled silently
away, coughing as he went, his old velvet shoes flapping
on and off at his heels. As for Wang Lung, left alone
with this woman, he did not know what to say or do. He
was stupefied with the silence everywhere. He glanced
into the next court and still there was no other person,
and about the court he saw heaps of refuse and filth and
scattered straw and branches of bamboo trees and dried
pine needles and the dead stalks of flowers, as though not
for a long time had any one taken a broom to sweep
it.

'Now then, wooden head!' said the woman with ex-
ceeding sharpness, and Wang Lung jumped at the sound
of her voice, so unexpected was its shrillness. 'What is
your business? If you have money, let me see it.'

'No,' said Qang Lung with caution, 'I did not say that
I had money. I have business.'

'Business means money,' returned the woman, 'either
money coming in or money going out, and there is no
money to go out of this house.'

'Well, but I cannot speak with a woman,' objected
Wang Lung mildly. He could make nothing of the situa-
tion in which he found himself, and he was still staring
about him.

'Well, and why not?' retorted the woman, with anger.



124



Then she shouted at him suddenly, 'Have you not heard,
fool, that there is no one here?'

Wang Lung stared at her feebly, unbelieving, and the
woman shouted at him again, 'I and the Old Lord — there
is no one else!'

'Where then?' asked Wang Lung, too much aghast to
make sen^ in his words.

'Well,/and the Old Mistress is dead/ returned the
woman. /'Have you not heard in the town how bandits
swept into the house and how they carried away what they
would of the slaves and of the goods ? And they hung the
Old Lord up by his thumbs and beat him and the Old
Mistress they tied in a chair and gagged her and every
one ran. But I stayed. I hid in a pond half full of water
under a wooden lid. And when I came out they were gone
and the Old Mistress sat dead in her chair, not from any
touch they had given her but from fright. Her body was
a rotten reed with the opium she smoked and she could
not endure the fright.'

'And the servants and the slaves?' gasped Wang Lung.
'And the gateman?'

'Oh, those,' she answered carelessly, 'they were gone
long ago — all those who had feet to carry them away, for
there was no food and no money by the middle of the
winter. Indeed,' her voice fell to a whisper, 'there are many
of the men servants among the bandits. I saw that dog of
a gateman myself — he was leading the way, although he
turned his face aside in the Old Lord's presence, still I
knew those three long hairs of his mole. And there were
others, for how could any but those familiar with the great
house know where jewels were hid and the secret treasure-
stores of things not to be sold? I would not put it beneath
the old agent himself, although he would consider it be-
neath his dignity to appear publicly in the affair, since he
is a sort of distant relative of the family.'

The woman fell silent and the silence of the courts was
heavy as silence can be after life has gone. Then the woman
said :

'J}ut all this was not a sudden thing. All during the
lifetime of the Old Lord and of his father the fall of this



125



house has been coming. In the last generation the lords
ceased to see the land and took the moneys the agents
gave them and spent it carelessly as water. And in these
generations the strength of the land has gone from them
and bit by bit the land has begun to go also/

'Where are the young lords?' asked Wang Lung, still
staring about him, so impossible was it for him to believe
these things.

'Hither and thither,' said the woman indifferently. 'It is
good fortune that the two girls were married away before
the thing happened. The elder young lord when he heard
what had befallen his father and his mother sent a messenger
to take the Old Lord, his father, but I persuaded the old
head not to go. I said, "Who will be in the courts, and it
is not seemly for me, who am only a woman." '

She pursed her narrow red lips virtuously as she spoke
these words, and cast down her bold eyes, and again she
said, when she had paused a little, 'Besides, I have been
my lord's faithful slave for these several years and I have
no other house.'

Wang Lung looked at her closely then and turned
quickly away.. He began to perceive what this was, a woman
who clung to an old and dying man because of what last
thing she might get from him. He said with contempt:

'Seeing that you are only a slave, how can I do business
with you?'

At that she cried out at him. 'He will do anything I
tell him.'

Wang Lung pondered over this reply. Well, and there
was the land. Others would buy it through this woman if
he did not.

'How much land is there left?' he asked her unwillingly,
and she saw instantly what his purpose was.

'If you have come to buy land,' she said quickly, 'there
is land to buy. He has a hundred acres to the west and to
the south two hundred that he will sell. It is not all in one
piece but the plots are large. It can be sold to the last
acre.'

This she said so readily that Wang Lung perceived she
knew everything the old man had left, even to the last foot

126



of land. But still he was unbelieving and not willing to
do business with her.

'It is not likely the Old Lord can sell all the land of
his family without the agreement of his sons,' he demurred.

But the woman met his words eagerly.

'As for that, the sons have told him to sell when he can.
The land is where no one of the sons wishes to live and
the country is run over with bandits in these days of fam-
ine, and they have all said, "We cannot live in such a
place. Let us sell and divide the money." '

'But into whose hand would I put the money?' asked
Wang Lung, still unbelieving.

'Into the Old Lord's hand, and whose else?' replied the
woman smoothly. But Wang Lung knew that the Old
Lord's hand opened into hers.

He would not, therefore, talk further with her, but
turned away saying. 'Another day — another day'; and he
went to the gate and she followed him, shrieking after him
into the street:

'This time to-morrow — this time or this afternoon — all
times are alike!'

He went down the street without answer, greatly puzzled
and needing to think over what he had heard. He went
into the small tea-shop and ordered tea of the slavey and
when the boy had put it smartly before him and with an
impudent gesture had caught and tossed the penny he paid
for it, Wang Lung fell to musing. And the more he mused
the more monstrous it seemed that the great and rich
family, who all his own life and all his father's and grand-
father's lives long had been a power and a glory in the
town, were now fallen and scattered.

'It comes of their leaving the land,' he thought regret-j!
fully, and he thought of his own two sons, who were
growing like young bamboo shoots in the spring, and he
resolved that on this very day he would make them cease
playing in the sunshine and he would set them to tasks in
the field, where they would early take into their bones and
their blood the feel of the soil under their feet, and the
feel of the hoe hard in their hands.

Well, but all this time here were these jewels hot and



127



heavy against his body and he was continually afraid. It
seemed as though their brilliance must shine through his
rags and some one cry out:

'Now here is a poor man carrying an emperor's treasure !'

And he could not rest until they were changed into
land. He watched, therefore, until the shopkeeper had a
moment of idleness, and he called to the man and said:

'Come and drink a bowl at my cost, and tell me the news
of the town, since I have been a winter away.'

The shopkeeper was always ready for such talk, espe-
cially if he drank his own tea at another's cost, and he sat
down readily at Wang Lung's table, a small weasel-faced
man with a twisted and crossed left eye. His clothes were
solid and black with grease down the front of his coat
and trousers, for besides tea he sold food also, which he
cooked himself, and he was fond of saying, 'There is a
proverb, "A good cook has never a clean coat",' and so
he considered himself justly and necessarily filthy. He sat
down and began at once :

'Well, and beyond the starving people, which is no
news, the greatest news was the robbery at the House of
Hwang.'

It was just what Wang Lung hoped to hear, and the
man went on to tell him of it with relish, describing how
the few slaves left had screamed and how they had been
carried off and how the concubines that remained had
been raped and driven out and some even taken away, so
that now none cared to live in that house at all. 'None/
the man finished, 'except the Old Lord, who is now wholly
the creature of a slave called Cuckoo, who has for many
years been in the Old Lord's chamber, while others came
and went, because of her cleverness.'

'And has this woman command, then?' asked Wang
Lung, listening closely,

'For the time she can do anything,' replied the man.
'And so for the time she closes her hand on everything
that can be held and swallows all that can be swallowed.
Some day, of course, when the young lords have their
affairs settled in other parts they will come back and then,
she cannot fool them with her talk of a faithful servant to



128



be rewarded, and out she will go. But she has her living
made now, although she live to a hundred years.'

'And the land?' asked Wang Lung at last, quivering
with his eagerness.

'The land?' said the man blankly. To this shop-keeper
land' meant nothing at all.

'Is it for sale?' said Wang Lung impatiently.

'Oh, tl^e land!' answered the man with indifference,
and then/ as a customer came in he rose and called as he
went, '1/ have heard it is for sale, except the piece where
the family are buried for these six generations,' and he
went his way.

Then Wang Lung rose also, having heard what he came
to hear, and he went out and approached again the great
gates and the woman came to open to him and he stood
without entering and he said to her:

'Tell me first this, will the Old Lord set his own seal
f to the deeds of sale?'

And the woman answered eagerly, and her eyes were
fastened on his :

'He will — he will — on my life!'

Then Wang Lung said to her plainly :

'Will you sell the land for gold or for silver or for
jewels?'

And her eyes glittered as she spoke and she said:
'I will sell it for jewels!'

XVII

WANG LUNG HAD NOW MORE LAND THAN A MAN
with an ox can plough and harvest, and more harvest
than one man can garner, and so he built another small
room to his house and he bought an ass and he said to his
neighbour Ching:

'Sell me the little parcel of land that you have and leave
your lonely house and come into my house and help me
with my land.' And Ching did this and was glad to do it.

The heavens rained in season then; and the young rice
grew and when the wheat was cut and harvested in heavy

129

5056, 9.



sheaves, the two men planted the young rice in the flooded
fields, more rice than Wang Lung had ever planted he
planted this year, for the rains came in abundance of water,
so that lands that were before dry were this year fit for rice.
Then when this harvest came he and Ching alone could not
harvest it, so great it was, and Wang Lung hired two other
men as labourers who lived in the village and they har-
vested it.

He remembered also the idle young lords of the fallen
great house as he worked on the land he had bought from
the House of Hwang, and he bade his two sons sharply
each morning to come into the fields with him and he set
them at what labour their small hands could do, guiding
the ox and the ass, and making them, if they could accom-
plish no great labour, at least to know the heat of the sun
on their bodies and the weariness of walking back and forth
along the furrows.

But O-lan he would not allow to work in the fields, for
he was no longer a poor man, but a man who could hire
labour if he would; and never had the land given forth
such harvests as it had this year. He was compelled to build
yet another room to the house to store his harvests in, or
they would not have had space to walk in the house. And
he bought three pigs and a flock of fowls to feed on the
grains spilled from the harvests.

Then O-lan worked in the house and made new clothes
for each one and new shoes, and she made coverings of
flowered cloth stuffed with warm new cotton for every bed
and when all was finished they were rich in clothing and
in bedding as they had never been. Then she laid herself
down upon her bed and gave birth again, although still
she would have no one with her; even though she could
hire whom she chose, she chose to be alone.

This time she was long at labour and when Wang Lung
came home at evening he found his father standing at the
door and laughing and saying :

'An egg with a double yolk this time!'

And when Wang Lung went into the inner room there
was O-lan upon the bed with tw T o new-born children, a
boy and a girl as alike as two grains of rice. He laughed



130



boisterously at what she had done and then he thought
tff a merry thing to say:

'So this is why you bore two jewels in your bosom!'

And he laughed again at what he had thought of to
say, and O-lan, seeing how merry he was, smiled her slow,
painful smile.

<r Wang Lung had, therefore, at this time no sorrow of
any kind /unless it was this sorrow, that his eldest girl
child nei/ther spoke nor did those things which were right
for her ^ge, but still only smiled her baby smile when she
caught her father's glance. Whether it was the desperate
first year of her life or the starving or what it was, month
after month went past and Wang Lung waited for the first
words to come from her lips, even for his name which the
children called him "da-da". But no sound came, only the
sweet, empty smile, and when he looked at her he groaned
forth :

'Little fool — my poor little fool/

And in his heart he cried to himself:

'I f I had s old this poor mouse and they found her thus
they would have killed hert*

And as if to make amends to the child, he made much
of her and took her into the field with him sometimes and
she followed him silently about, smiling, when he spoke
and noticed her there.

In these parts, where Wang Lung had lived all his life
and his father and his father's father had lived upon the
land, there were famines once in five years, or, if the gods
were lenient, once in seven or eight or even ten years.
This was because the heavens rained too much or not at
all, or because the river to the north, because of rains and
winter snows in distant mountains, came swelling into the
fields over the dykes which had been builded by men for
centuries to confine it.

Time after time men fled from the land and came back
to it, but Wang Lung set himself now to build his fortunes
so securely that through the bad years to come he need
never leave his land again but live on the fruits of the good
years, and so subsist until another year came forth. He set

131



himself and the gods helped him and for seven years there
were harvests, and every year Wang Lung and his men
threshed far more than could be eaten. He hired more labour-
ers each year for his fields until he had six men and he build-
ed a new house behind his old one, a large room behind a
court and two small rooms on each side of the court beside
the large room. The house he covered with tiles, but thei
walls were still made of the hard tamped earth from the
fields, only he had them brushed with lime and they were
white and clean. Into these rooms he and his family moved,
and the labourers, with Ching at their head, lived in the old
house in front.

By this time Wang Lung had thoroughly tried Ching,
and he found the man honest and faithful, and he set Ching
to be his steward over the men and over the land and he
paid him well, two silver pieces a month besides his food.
But with all Wang Lung's urging Ching to eat and eat well,
the man still put no flesh on his bones, remaining always a
small, spare, lean man of great gravity. Nevertheless he
laboured gladly, pottering silently from dawn until dark,
speaking in his feeble voice if there was anything to be
said, but happiest and liking it best if there were nothing
and he could be silent: and hour after hour he lifted his
hoe and let it fall, and at dawn and sunset he would carry
to the fields the buckets of water or of manure to put upon
the vegetable rows.

But still Wang Lung knew that if any one of the labour-
ers slept too long each day under the date trees or ate
more than his share of the bean-curd in the common dish
or if any bade his wife or child come secretly at harvest
time and snatch handfuls of the grain that was being beaten
out under the flails, Ching would, at the end of the year
when master and man feast together after the harvest, whis-
per to Wang Lung:

'Such an one and such an one do not ask back for the
next year.'

And it seemed that the handful of peas and of seed
which had passed between these two men made them broth-
ers, except that Wang Lung, who was the younger, took
the place of the elder, and Ching never wholly forgot that



132



he was hire d and lived in a house which belonged to another.

By the end of the fifth year Wang Lung worked little
in his fields himself, having indeed to spend his whole j
time, so increased were his lands, upon the business and !l
the marketing of his produce, and in directing his workmen, j
He was' greatly hampered by his lack of book knowledge
and of the knowledge of the meaning of characters written
upon a P^per with a camel's hair brush and ink. Moreover,
it was a/shame to him when he was in a grain shop where j
grain was bought and sold again, that when a contract was
written for so much and for so much of wheat or rice, he
must say humbly to the haughty dealers in the town:

'Sir, and will you read it for me, for I am too stupid.'

And it was a shame to him that when he must set his
name to the contract another, even a paltry clerk, lifted his
eyebrows in scorn, and with his brush pointed on the wet
ink block, brushed hastily the characters of Wang Lung's
name; and greatest shame that when the man called out
for a joke:

'Is it the dragon character Lung or the deaf character
Lung, or what?' Wang Lung must answer humbly:

'Let it be what you will, for I am too ignorant to know
my own name.'

It was on such a day one harvest time, after he had heard
the shout of laughter which went up from the clerks in
the grain shop, idle at the noon hour and all listening to
anything that went on, and all lads scarcely older than his
sons, that he went home angrily over his own land saying
to himself:

'Now, not one of those town fools has a foot of land
and yet each feels he can laugh a goose cackle at me be-
cause I cannot tell the meanings of brush strokes over pa-
per.' And then as his indignation wore away, he said in his
heart, 'It is true that this a shame to me that I cannot read
and write. I will take my elder son from the fields and he
shall go to a school in the town and he shall learn, and
when I go into the grain markets he will read and write /
for me so that there may .be an end of this hissing laughter |
against me, who am a landed man.'

This seemed to him well and that very day he called to



133



him his elder son, a straight tall lad of twelve years now,
looking like his mother for his wide face bones and his
big hands and feet but with his father's quickness of eye,
and when the boy stood before him Wang Lung said:

'Come out of the fields from this day on, for I need a
scholar in the family to read the contracts and to write my
name so that I shall not be ashamed in the town.'

The lad flushed a high dark red and his eyes shone.

'My father,' he said, 'so have I wished for these last two
years that I might do, but I did not dare to ask it.'

Then the younger boy when he heard of it came in crying
and complaining, a thing he was wont to do, for he was
a wordy, noisy lad from the moment he spoke at all, always
ready to cry out that his share was less than that of others,
and now he whined forth to his father:

'Well, and I shall not work in the fields either, and it is
not fair that my brother can sit at leisure in a seat and learn
something and I must work like a hind, who am your son
as well as he!'

Then Wang Lung could not bear his noise and he would
give him anything if he cried loudly enough for it, and he
said hastily:

'Well and well, go the both of you, and 'if heaven in its
| evil take one of you, there will be the other one with know-
edge to do the business for me.'

1 Then he sent the mother of his sons into the town to
buy cloth to make a long robe for each lad and he went
himself to a paper and ink shop and he bought paper and
brushes and two ink blocks, although he knew nothing of
such things, and being ashamed to say he did not, was
dubious at everything the man brought forward to show
him. But at last all was prepared and arrangements made
to send the boys to a small school near the city gate kept
by an old man who had in past years gone up for govern-
ment examinations and failed. In the central room of his
house therefore be had set benches and tables and for a
small sum at each feast day in the year he taught boys in
the classics, beating them with his large fan, folded, if they
were idle or if they could not repeat to him the pages over
which they pored from dawn until sunset.



134



Only in the warm days of spring and summer did the
pupils have a respite, for then the old man nodded and
slept after he had eaten at noon, and the dark small robm
was filled with the sound of his slumber. Then the lads
whispered and played and drew pictures t® show each
other of this naughty thing and that, and snickered to see
a fly buzzing about the old man's hanging, open jaw, and
laid wagers with each other as to whether the fly would
enter the cavern of his mouth or not. But when the old
teacher ppened his eyes suddenly — and there was no telling
when he would open them as quickly and secretly as though
he had not slept — he saw them before they were aware,
and then he laid about him with his fan, cracking this skull,
and that. And hearing the cracks of his stout fan and the
cries of the pupils, the neighbours said:

c It is a worthy old teacher, after all.' And this is why
Wang Lung chose the school for the one where his sons
should go to learn.

On the first day when he took them there he walkedl
ahead of them, for it is not meet that father and son walk!
side by side, and he carried a blue kerchief filled with fresh |
eggs and these eggs he gave to the old teacher when he
arrived. And Wanr* Lung was awed by the old teacher's
great brass spectacles and by his long loose robe of black
and by his immense fan, which he held even in winter,
and Wang Lung bowed before him and said:

'Sir, here are my two worthless sons. If anything can
be driven into their thick brass skulls it is only by beating
them, and therefore if you wish to please me, beat them to
make them learn.' And the two boys stood and stared at
the other boys on benches, and these others stared back
at the two.

But going home again alone, having left the two lads,
Wang Lung's heart was fit to burst with pride, and it
seemed to him that among all the lads in the room there
were none equal to his two lads for tallness and robustness
and bright brown faces. Meeting a neighbour coming from
the village as he passed through the town gate, he answered
the man's inquiry:

'This day I am back from my sons' school.' And to the



135



man's surprise he answered with seeming carelessness, 'Now
I do not need them in the fields and they may as well learn
a stomachful of characters.'

But to himself he said, passing by :

'It would not surprise me at all if the elder one should-
become a prefect with all this learning!'

And from that time on the boys were no longer called
Elder and Younger, but they were given school names by
the old teacher, and this old man, after inquiring into the
occupation of their father, erected two names for the sons :
for the elder, Nung En, and for the second Nung Wen,
and the first word of each name signified one whose wealth
is from the earth.

XVIII

THUS WANG LUNG BUILDED THE FORTUNES OF HIS
house, and when the seventh year came, the great river to
the north was too heavy with swollen waters because of
excessive rains and snows in the northwest, where its source
was, and burst its bounds and came sweeping and flooding
all over the lands of that region. But Wang Lung was not
afraid. He was not afraid although two-fifths of his land
was a lake as deep as a man's shoulders and more.

All through the late spring and early summer the water
rose and at last it lay like a great sea, lovely and idle, mir-
roring cloud and moon and willows and bamboos whose
trunks stood submerged. Here and there an earthen house,
abandoned by the dwellers, stood up until after days of the
water it fell slowly back into the water and the earth. And
so it was with all houses that were not, like Wang Lung's,
builded upon a hill, and these hills stood up like islands.
And men went to and from town by boat and by raft, and
there were those who starved as they ever had.
C" But Wang Lung was not afraid. The grain markets owed
him money and his store-rooms were yet filled full with
harvests of the last two years and his houses stood high
so that the water was a long way off and he had nothing
to fear.

But since much of the land could not be planted he was
136



more idle than he had ever been in his life and being idle
and full of good food he grew impatient when he had slept
all he could sleep and done all there was to be done. There
were, besides, the labourers, whom he hired for a year at a
time, and it was foolish for him to work when there were
those who ate his rice while they were half idle waiting day
after day for the waters to recede. So after he had bade them
mend the thatching of the old house and see to the setting
of the tiles where the new roof leaked and had commanded
them to mend the hoes and the rakes and the ploughs and
to feed the cattle and to buy ducks to herd upon the water
and to twist hemp into ropes — all those things which in
the old days he did himself when he tilled his land alone —
his own hands were empty and he did not know what to do
with himself.

Now a man cannot sit all day and stare at a lake of
water covering his fields, not can he eat more than he is
able to hold at one time, and when Wang Lung had slept,
there was an end to sleeping. The house, as he wandered
about it impatiently, was silent, too silent for his vigorous
blood. The old man grew very feeble now, half blind and
almost wholly deaf, and there was no need of speech with
him except to ask if he were warm and fed or if he would
drink tea. And it made Wang Lung impatient that the old
man could not see how rich his son was and would always
mutter if there were tea leaves in his bowl, "a little water
is well enough and tea like silver". But there was no telling
the old man anything, for he forgot it at once and lived
drawn into his own world, and much of the time he dream-
ed he was a youth again and in his own fullness; he saw
little of what passed him now.

The old man and the elder girl, who never spoke at all
but sat beside her grandfather hour after hour, twisting
a bit of cloth, folding and re-folding it and smiling at it,
these two had nothing to say to a man prosperous and
vigorous. When Wang Lung had poured the old man a
bowl of tea and had passed his hand over the girl's cheek
and received her sweet, empty smile, which passed with
such sad swiftness from her face, leaving empty the dim
and unshining eyes, there was nothing left. He always turned

137



away from her with a moment's stillness, which was his
daughter's mark of sadness on him, and he looked to his
two younger children, the boy and the girl which O-lan
had borne together and who now ran about the threshold
merrily.

But a man cannot be satisfied with the foolishness of
little children, and after a brief time of laughter and teas-
ing they went off to their own games and Wang Lung was
alone and filled with restlessness. Then it was that he looked
at O-lan, his wife, as a man looks at the woman whose body
he knows thoroughly and to satiation and who has lived
beside him so closely that there is nothing he does not
know of her and nothing new which he may expect or
hope from her.

And it seemed to Wang Lung that he looked at O-lan
for the first time in his life and he saw for the first time
that she was a woman whom no man could call other than
\ she was, a dull and common creature, who plodded in
silence without thought of how she appeared to others. He
saw for the first time that her hair was rough and brown
and unoiled and that her face was large and flat and coarse-
skinned, and her features too large altogether and without
| any sort of beauty or light. Her eyebrows were scattered
? and the hairs too few, and her lips were too wide, and her
? hands and feet were large and spreading. Looking at her
I thus with strange eyes, he cried out at her:

'Now any one looking at you would say you were the
J wife of a common fellow and never of one who has land
! which he hires men to plough!'

It was the first time he had ever spoken of how she
seemed to him and she answered with a slow painful gaze.
She sat upon a bench threading a long needle in and out
of a shoe sole and she stopped and held the needle poised
and her mouth gaped open and showed her blackened teeth.
Then as if she understood at last that he had looked at her
as a man at a woman, a thick red flush crept up over her
high cheek bones and she muttered :

'Since those two last ones were born together I have
not been well. There is a fire in my vitals.'

And he saw that in her simplicity she thought he accus-

138



ed her because for more than seven years she had not
conceived: And he answered more roughly than he meant
to do:

'I mean, cannot you buy a little oil for your hair as other
women do and make yourself a new coat of black cloth?
And those shoes you wear are not fit for a land proprietor's
wife, sucjh as you now are.'

But sr/e answered nothing, only looked at him humbly
and without knowing what she did, and she hid her feet
one over the other under the bench on which she sat. Then,
although in his heart he was ashamed that he reproached
thlT creature who through all these years had followed him
faithfully as a dog, and although he remembered that when
he was poor and laboured in the fields himself she left her
becTeven after a child was born and came to help him in
the harvest fields, yet he could not stem the irritation in
his breast and he went on ruthlessly, although against his
inner will:

^Thave laboured and have grown rich and I would have
my wife look less like a hind. And those feet of yours '

He stopped. It seemed to him that she was altogether
hideous, but the most hideous of all were her big feet in
their loose cotton-cloth shoes, and he looked at them with
anger so that she thrust them yet farther under the bench.
And at last she said in a whisper :

'My mother did not bind them, since I was sold so young.
But the girl's feet I will bind — the younger girl's feet I
will bind.' ^

But he flung himself off because he was ashamed that
he was angry at her and angry because she would not be
angry in return but only was frightened. And he drew his
new black robe on him, saying fretfully:

'Well, and I will go to the tea-shop and see if I can hear
anything new. There is nothing in my house except fools
and a dotard and two children.'

His ill-temper grew as he walked to the town because
he remembered suddenly that all these new lands of his he
could not have bought in a lifetime if O-lan had not seized
the handful of jewels from the rich man's house and if she
had not given them to him when he commanded her. But



*39



when he remembered this he was the more angry and he
said as if to answer his own heart rebelliously :

4 Well, and but she did not. know whar she did. She seized
them for pleasure as a child may seize a handful of red and
green sweets, and she would have hidden them for ever in
her bosom if I had not found it out.'

Then he wondered if she still hid the pearls between her
breasts. But where before it had been strange and somehow
a thing for him to think about sometimes and Eg picture
in his mind, now he thought of it with contempt, for her
breasts had grown flabby and pendulous with many chil-
dren and had no beauty, and pearls between them were
foolish and a waste.

But all this might have been nothing if Wang Lung were
still a poor man or if the water were not spread over his
fields. But he had money. There was silver hidden in the
walls of his house and there was a sack of silver buried
under a tile in the floor of his new house, and there was
silver wrapped in a cloth in the box in his room where he
slept with his wife, and silver sewed into the mat under
their bed, and his girdle was full of silver and he had no
kcj£_jo£jLtJ So that now, instead of its passing from him
like life blood draining from a woun,d, it lay in his girdle
burning his fingers when he felt of it, and eager to be spent
on this or that, and he began to be careless of it and to
think what he could do to enjoy the days of his manhood.
S~ Everything seemed not so good to him as it was before.
The tea-shop which he used to enter timidly, feeling him-
self but a common country fellow, now seemed dingy and
mean to him. In the old days none knew him there and
the tea-boys were impudent to him, but now people nudged
each other when he came in and he could hear a man whis-
per to another:

'There is that man Wang from the Wang village, he
who bought the land from the House of Hwang that winter
the Old Lord died when there was the great famine. He
| is rich, now.'

And Wang Lung, hearing this, sat down with seeming
carelessness, but his heart swelled with pride at what he
was. But on this day when he had reproached his wife

140



even the deference he received did not please him and he
sat gloomily drinking his tea and feeling that nothing was
as good in his life as he had believed. And then he thought
suddenly 0 himself:

'Now why should I drink my tea at this shop, whose
owner is) a cross-eyed weasel and whose earnings are less
than the labourer's upon my land, I who have land and ,
whose sons are scholars?'

And he rose up quickly and threw his money on the
table and went out before any could speak to him. He
wandered forth upon the streets of the town without know-
ing what it was he wished. Once he passed by a story-
teller's booth and for a little while he sat down upon
the end of a crowded bench and listened to the man's tale
of old days in the Three Kingdoms, when warriors were
brave and cunning. But he was still restless and he could
not come under the man's spell as the others did and the
sound of the little brass gong the man beat wearied him
and he stood up again and went on.

Now there was in the town a great tea-shop but newly
opened and by a man from the south, who understood
such business, and Wang Lung had before this passed byV
the place, filled with horror at the thought of how money
was spent there in gambling and in play and in evil women.
But now, driven by his unrest from idleness and wiahing to
escape from the reproach of his own heart when he re-
membered that he had been unjust to his wife, he went
toward this place. He was compelled by his restlessness to
see or to hear something new. Thus he stepped across the
threshold of the new tea-shop into the great glittering
room, full of tables and open to the street as it was, and he
went in, bold enough in his bearing and trying to be the
more bold because his heart was timid and he remembered
that only in the last few years he more than a poor man
who had not at any time more than a silver piece or two
ahead, and a man who had even laboured at pulling a
rickshaw on the streets of a southern city.

At first he did not speak at all in the great tea-house
but he bought his tea quietly and drank it and looked
about him with wonder. This shop was a great hall and



141



the ceiling was set about with gilt and upon the walls
there were scrolls hung, made of white silk and painted
with the figures of women. Now these women Wang Lung
looked at secretly and closely and it seemed to him they
were women in dreams, for none on earth had he seen like
them. And the first day he looked at them and drank his
tea quickly and went away.

But day after day while the waters held on his land he
went to this tea-shop and bought tea and sat alone and
drank it and stared at the pictures of the beautiful women,
and each day he sat longer, since there was nothing for
him to do on his land or in his house. So he might have
continued for many days on end, for in spite of his silver
hidden in a score of places he was still a country-looking
fellow and the only one in all that rich tea-shop who wore
cotton instead of silk and had a braid of hair down his
back such as no man in a town will wear. But one evening
when he sat drinking and staring from a table near the back
of the hall, some one came down from a narrow stair which
clung to the furthermost wall and led to the upper floor.

Now this tea-shop was the only building in all that
town which had an upper floor, except the Western Pagoda,
which stood five stories high outside the West Gate. But
the pagoda was narrow and more narrow towards the top,
while the second floor of the tea-shop was as square as that
part of the building which stood upon the ground. At
night the high singing of women's voices and light laughter
floated out of the upper windows and the sweet strumming
of lutes struck delicately by the hands of girls. One could
hear the music streaming into the streets, especially after
midnight, although where Wang Lung sat the clatter and
noise of many men drinking tea and the sharp bony click
of dice and sparrow dominoes muffled all else.

Thus it was that Wang Lung did not hear behind him
on this night the footsteps of a woman creaking upon the
narrow stair, and so, not expecting that any would know
him here, he started violently when one touched him on
the shoulder. When he looked up it was into a narrow,
handsome, woman's face, the face of Cuckoo, the woman
into whose hands he had poured the jewels that day he

142



bought land, and whose hand had held steady the Old
Lord's shaking one and helped him to set aright his seal
upon the de^ed of the sale. She laughed when she saw him,
and her laughter was a sort of sharp whispering.



'Well, (and Wang the farmer!' she said, lingering with
malice o§ the word farmer, 'and who would think to see



It seemed to Wang Lung then that he must prove at
any cost to this woman that he was more than a mere
country fellow, and he laughed and said too loudly:

'Is not my money as good to spend as another man's?
And money I do not lack in these days. I have had good
fortune.'

Cuckoo stopped at this, her eyes narrow and bright as
a snake's eyes, and her voice smooth as oil flowing from a
vessel.

'And who has not heard it? And how shall a man
better spend the money he has over and above his living
than in a place like this, where rich men take their joy
and elegant lords gather to take their joy in feasting and
pleasure? There is no such wine as ours — have you tasted
it, Wang Lung?'

'I have only drunk tea as yet,' replied Wang Lung, and
he was half ashamed. 'I have not touched wine or dice.'

'Tea!' she exclaimed after him, laughing shrilly. 'But
we have tiger bone wine and dawn wine and wine of
fragrant rice — why need you drink tea?' And as Wang
Lung hung his head she said softly and insidiously:

'And I suppose you have not looked at anything else, have
you, eh?— ^No pretty little hands, no sweet-smelling cheeks ?'

Wang Lung hung his head yet lower and the red blood
rushed into his face and he felt as though every one near
looked at him with mockery and listened to the voice of
the woman. But when he took heart to glance about from
under his lids, he saw no one paying any heed and the
rattling of dice burst out anew and so he said in confusion :

'No — no — I have not — only tea '

Then the woman laughed again and pointed to the
painted silken scrolls and said:

'There they are, their pictures. Choose which one you



you here!'



143



wish to see and put the silver in my hand and I will place
her before you.'

'Those!' said Wang Lung, wondering. 'I thought they
were pictures of dream women, of goddesses in the moun-
tain of Kwen Lwen, such as the storytellers speak of!'

'So they are dream women/ rejoined Cuckoo, with
mocking good humour, 'but dreams such as a little silver
will turn into flesh.' And she went on her way, nodding
and winking at the servants standing about and motioning
to Wang Lung as at one of whom she said, 'There is a
country bumpkin!'

But Wang Lung sat staring at the pictures with a new
interest. Up this narrow stairway then, in the rooms above
him, there were these women in flesh and blood, and men
went up to them — other men than he, of course, but men !
Well, and if he were not the man he was — a good and
working man, a man with a wife and sons — which picture
would he, pretending as a child pretends that he might do
a certain thing, pretending then, which would he pretend
to take? And he looked at every painted face closely and j
with intensity as though each were real. Before this they j
had all seemed equally beautiful, before this when there
had been no question of choosing. But now there were
clearly some more beautiful than others, and out of the
score and more he chose three most beautiful, and out of
the three he chose again and he chose one most beautiful,
a small, slender thing, a body light as a bamboo and a
little face as pointed as a kitten's face, and one handj
clasping the stem of a lotus flower in bud, and the hand
as delicate as the tendril of a fern uncurled.

He stared at her and as he stared a heat like wine poured
through his veins.

'She is like a flower on a quince tree,' he said suddenly
aloud, and hearing his own voice he was alarmed and
ashamed and he rose hastily and put down his money
and went out and into the darkness that has now fallen
and so to his home.

But over the fields and the water the moonlight hung,
a net of silver mist, and in his body his blood ran secret
and hot and fast.

144



50;



/ XIX

NOW IF THE WATERS HAD AT THIS TIME RECEDED
from Wang Lung's land, leaving it wet and smoking
under the sun, so that in a few days of summer heat it
would need to* have been ploughed and harrowed and
seed put in, Wang Lung might never have gone again to
the great tea-shop. Or if a child had fallen ill or the old
man had reached suddenly to the end of his days, W T ang
Lung might have been caught up in the new thing and so
forgotten the pointed face upon the scroll and the body
of the woman slender as a bamboo.

But except for the slight summer wind that rose at
sunset, the waters lay placid and unmoved, and the old
man dozed, and the two boys trudged to school at dawn
and were away until evening, and in his house Wang Lung
was restless and he avoided the eyes of O-lan, who looked
at him miserably as he went here and there and flung him-
self down in a chair and rose from it without drinking the
tea she poured and without smoking the pipe he had lit.
At the end of one long day, more long than any other, in
the seventh month, when the twilight lingered murmurous
and sweet with the breath of the lake, he stood at the door
of his house, and suddenly without a word he turned
abruptly and went into his room and put on his new coat,
even the coat of black shining cloth, as shining almost as
silk, that O-lan made for feast days, and with no word to
any one he went over the narrow paths along the water's
edge and through the fields until he came to the darkness
of the city gate and through this he went and through the
streets until he came to the new tea-shop.

There every light was lit, bright oil lamps which are to
be bought in the foreign cities of the coast, and men sat
under the lights drinking and talking, their robes open to
the evening coolness, and everywhere fans moved to and
fro and good laughter flowed out like music into the street.
All the gaiety which Wang Lung had ever had from his
labour on the land was held here in the walls of this house
where men met to play and never to work.

145

5056, 10.



Wang Lung hesitated upon the threshold and he stood
in the bright light which streamed from the open doors.
And he might have stood there and gone away, for he was
fearful and timid in his heart still, although his blood was
rushing through his body fit to burst his veins, but there
came out of the shadows on the edge of the light a woman
who had been leaning idly against the doorway and it was
Cuckoo. She came forward when she saw a man's figure,
for it was her business to get custom for the women of the
house, but when she saw who it was, she shrugged her
shoulders and said:

'At, it is only the farmer!'

Wang was stung with the sharp carelessness in her
voice, and his sudden anger gave him a courage he had
not otherwise, so that he said:

'Well, and may I not come into the house and may I
not do as other men?'

And she shrugged herself again and laughed and
said :

'If you have the silver that other men have, you may
do as they do.'



And he wished to show her that he was lordly and
rich enough to do as he liked, and he thrust his hand into
his girdle and brought it out full of silver and he said
to her:

'Is it enough and is it not enough?'

She stared at the handful of silver and said then without
further delay:
\_y 'Come and say which one you wish.'

And Wang Lung, without knowing what he said, mut-
tered forth:

'Well, and I do not know that I want anything.' And
then his desire overcame him and he whispered, 'That
little one— that one with the pointed chin and the little
small face, a face like a quince blossom for white and
pink, and she holds a lotus bud in her hand.'

The woman nodded easily and beckoning him she
threaded her way between the crowded tables, and Wang
Lung followed her at a distance. At first it seemed to him
that every man looked up and watched him but when he




146



took courage to see he saw that none paid him any heed,
except for one or two who called out, 'Is it late enough,
then to go to th& women?' and another called, 'Here is
a lusty fellow who needs must begin early.'

But by this time they were walking up the narrow
straight stairway, and this Wang Lung did with difficulty,
for it was the first time he had ever climbed steps in a
house. Nevertheless, when they reached the top, it was the
same as a house on the earth, except that it seemed a
mighty way up when he passed a window and looked into
the sky. The woman led the way down a close dark hall,
then, and she cried as she went:

'Now here is the first of the night!'

All along the hall doors opened suddenly and here and
there girls' heads showed themselves in patches of light, as
flowers burst out of their sheaths in the sun, but Cuckoo
called cruelly:

'No, not you— and not you — no one has asked for any I
of you! This one is for the little pink-faced dwarf from i
Soochow — for Lotus!'

A ripple of sound ran down the hall, indistinct, derisive,
and one girl, ruddy as a pomegranate, called out in a big
voice :

'And Lotus may have this fellow — he smells of the
fields and of garlic!'

This Wang Lung heard, although he disdained to an-
swer, although her words smote him like a daggerthrust
because he feared that he looked indeed what he was, a
farmer. But he went on stoutly when he remembered the
good silver in his girdle, and at last the woman struck a
closed door harshly with the flat palm of her hand and
Went in without waiting and there upon a bed covered with
a flowered red quilt, sat a slender girl.

If one had told him there were small hands like these
he would not have believed it, hands so small and bones
so fine and fingers so pointed with long nails stained the
colour of lotus buds, deep and rosy. And if one had told
him that there could be feet like these, little feet thrust
into pink satin shoes no longer than a man's middle finger,



H7



and swinging childishly over the bed's edge-— if any one
had told him he would not have believed it.

He sat stiffly on the bed beside her, staring at her,
and he saw that she was like the picture and having seen
the picture he would have known her if he had met her.
But most of all her hand was like the painted hand, curling
and fine and white as milk. Her two hands lay curling
into each other upon the pink and silken lap of her robe,
and he would not have dreamed that they were to be
touched.

f He looked at her as he had looked at the picture, and
he saw the figure slender as bamboo in its tight short
upper coat; he saw the small pointed face set in its painted
prettiness above the high collar lined with white fur; he
saw the round eyes, the shape of apricots, so that now at
last he understood what the storytellers meant when they
sang of the apricot eyes of the beauties of old. And for
him she was not flesh and blood but the painted picture of
a woman.

Then- she lifted that small curling hand and put it upon
his shoulder and she passed it slowly down the length of
his arm, very slowly. And although he had never felt
anything so light, so soft as that touch, although if he had
not seen it he would not have known that it passed, he
looked and saw the small hand moving down his arm, and
it was as though fire followed it and burned under through
his sleeve and into the flesh of his arm, and he watched
the hand until it reached the end of his sleeve and then it
fell with an instant's practised hesitation upon his bare
wrist and then into the loose hollow of his hard dark hand.
And he began to tremble, not knowing how to receive it.
T N Then he heard laughter, light, quick, tinkling as the
! silver bell upon a pagoda shaking in the wind, and a little
\ voice like laughter said:

c Oh, and how ignorant you are, you great fellow! Shall
we sit here the night through whole you stare?'

And at that he seized her hand between both of his, but
carefully, because it was like a fragile dry leaf, hot and
dry, and he said to her imploringly and not knowing what
he said:

148



'I do not know anything — teach me!'

And she taught mm.

Now Wang Lung became sick with the sickness which
is greater than any a man can have. He had suffered under
labour in the sun and he had suffered under the dry icy
winds of the bitter desert and he had suffered from star- I
vation when the fields would not bear and he had suffered 1
from the despair of labouring without hope upon the |
streets of a southern city. But under none of these did he
suffer as he now did under this slight girl's hand.

Every day he went to the tea-shop; every evening he
waited until she would receive him, and every night he
went in to her. Each night he went in and each night
again he was the country fellow who knew nothing, trem-
bling at the door, sitting stiffly beside her, waiting for her
signal of laughter, and then fevered, filled with a sickened
hunger, he followed slavishly, bit by bit, her unfolding,
until the moment of crisis, when, like a flower that is ripe
for plucking, she was willing that he should grasp her
wholly.

Yet never could he grasp her wholly, and this it was
which kept him fevered and thirsty, even if she gave him
HeTwill of her. When O-lan had come to his house it was
health to his flesh and he lusted for her robustly as a beast
for its mate, and he took her and was satisfied and he
forgot her and did his work content. But there was no
such content now in his love for this girl, and there was no
health in her for him. At night when she would have no
more of him, pushing him out of the door petulantly, with
her small hands suddenly strong on his should.ers, his silver
thrust into her bosom, he went away hungry as he came.
It was as though a man, dying of thirst, drank the salt
water of the sea, which though it is water, yet dries his
blood into thirst and yet greater thirst so that in the end
he dies, maddened by his very drinking. He went in to her
and he had his will of her again and again and he came
away unsatisfied.

All during the hot summer Wang Lung loved thus this
girl. He knew nothing of her, whence she came or what
she was; when they were together he said not a score of



149



words and he scarcely listened to the constant running of
her speech, light and interspersed with laughter like a
child's. He only watched her face, her hands, the postures
"of her body, the meaning of her wide sweet eyes, waiting
for her. He had never enough of her, and he went back
to his house in the dawn, dazed and unsatisfied.

The days were endless. He would not sleep any more
upon his bed, making a pretence of heat in the room, and
he spread a mat under the bamboos and slept there fit-
fully, lying awake to stare into the pointed shadows of the
bamboo leaves, his breast filled with a sweet sick pain he
could not understand.

And if any spoke to him, his wife or his children, or if
Ching came to him and said, c The waters will soon recede
and what is there we should prepare of seed?' he shouted
and said:

'Why do you trouble me?'

And all the time his heart was like to burst because he
could not be satisfied of this girl.

Thus as the days went on and he lived only to pass
the day until the evening came, he would not look at the
grave faces of O-lan and of the children, suddenly sober in
their play when he approached, nor even at his old father
who peered at him and asked:

'What is this sickness that turns you full of evil temper
and your skin as yellow as clay?'

And as these days went past to the night, the girl Lotus
did what she would with him. When she laughed at the
braid of his hair, although part of every day he spent
in braiding and in brushing it, and said, 'Now the men
of the south do not have these monkey tails!' he went
without a word and had it cut off, although neither by
laughter or scorn had any one been able to persuade him
to it before.

When O-lan saw what he had done she burst out in
terror :

\~ 'You have cut off your life!'
But he shouted at her:

'And shall I look an old-fashioned fool for ever? All
the young men of the city have their hair cut short.'

150



Yet he was afraid in his heart of what he had done,
and yet so he would have cut off his life if the girl Lotus
had commanded it or desired it, because she had every
beauty wljiich had ever come into his mind to desire in a
woman. \

His good brown body that he washed but rarely, deem-
ing the clean sweat of his labour washing enough for or-
dinary times, his body he now began to examine as if it
were another man's, and he washed himself every day so
that his wife said, troubled:

'You will die with all this washing!'

He bought sweet-smelling soap in the shop, a piece of
red' scented stuff from foreign parts, and he rubbed it on
his flesh, and not for any price would he have eaten a
stalk of garlic, although it was a thing he had loved be-
fore, lest he stink before the girl Lotus.

And none in his house knew what to make of all these
things.

He bought also new stuffs for clothes, and although
O-lan had always cut his robes, making them wide and
long for good measure and sewing them stoutly this way
and that for strength, now he was scornful of her cutting
and sewing and he took the stuffs to a tailor in the town
and he had his clothes made as the men in the town had
theirs, light grey silk for a robe, cut neatly to his body
and with little to spare, and over this a black satin sleeve-
less coat. And he bought the first shoes he had had in
his life not made by a woman, and they were black velvet
shoes such as the Old Lord had worn flapping at his heels.

But these fine clotjies he was ashamed to wear sud-
denly before O-lan and his children. He kept them folded
in sheets of brown oiled paper and he left them at the tea-
shop with a clerk he had come to know, ^nd for a price
the clerk let him go into an inner room secretly and put
them on before he went up the stairs. And beyond this
he bought a silver ring washed with gold* for his finger,
and as hair grew where it had been shaved above his fore-
head, he smoothed it with a fragrant foreign oil from a
small bottle for which he had paid a whole piece of silver.
But O-lan looked at him in astonishment and did not

151



know what to make of all this, except that one day after
staring at him for a long time as they ate rice at noon, she
said heavily:

^ 'There is that about you which makes me think of one

of the lords in the great house.'

Wang Lung laughed loudly then and he said :

'And am I always to look like a hind when we have

enough and to spare?'

But in his heart he was greatly pleased and for that

day he was more kindly with her than he had been for

many days.

Now the money, the good silver, went streaming out of
his hands. There was not only the price he must pay for
his hours with the girl, but there was the pretty demand-
ing of her desires. She would sigh and murmur, as though
her heart were half broken with her desire:

'Ah me — ah me!'

And when he whispered, having learned at last to speak
in her presence, 'What now, my little heart?' she answered,
'I have no joy to-day in you because Black Jade, that one
across the hall from me, has a lover who gave her a gold
pin for her hair, and I have only this old silver thing,
which I have had for ever and a day.'

And then for his life's sake he could not but whisper
to her, pushing aside the smooth black curve of her hair
that he might have the delight of seeing her small long-
lobed ears:

'And so will I buy a gold pin for the hair of my jewel.'

For all these names of love she had taught him, as one
teaches new words to a child. She had taught him to say
them to her and he could not say them enough for his
own heart, even while he stammered them, he whose
speech had all his life been only of planting and of harvests
and of sun and rain.

Thus the silver came out of the wall and out of the
sack, and O-lan who in the old days might have said to
him easily enough, 'And why do you take the money from
the wall,' now said nothing, only watching him in great
misery, knowing well that he was living some life apart



152



from her and apart even from the land, but not knowing
what life it was. But she had been afraid of him from
that day when he had seen clearly that she had no beauty
of hair or of person and when he had seen her feet were
large, and she was afraid to ask him anything, because of ^
his anger that was always ready for her now.

There came a day when Wang Lung returned to his
house over the fields and he drew near to her as she washed
his clothes at the pool. He stood there silent for a while
and then he said to her roughly, and he was rough because
he was ashamed and would not acknowledge his shame in
his heart:

'Where are those pearls you had?'

And she answered timidly, looking up from the edge of
the pool and from the clothes she was beating upon a
smooth flat stone:

'The pearls? I have them.'

And he muttered, not looking at her but at her wrinkled,
wet hands:

"There is no use in keeping pearls for nothing.'
Then she said slowly:

e I thought one day I might have them set in earrings,'
and fearing his laughter she said again, 'I could have them
for the younger girl when she is wed.'

And he answered her loudly, hardening his heart:

'Why should that one wear pearls with her skin as
black as earth? Pearls are for fair women!' And then after
an instant's silence he cried out suddenly, 'Give them to
me — I have need of them!'

Then slowly she thrust her wet wrinkled hand into her
bosom and she drew forth the small package and she gave \
it to him and watched him as he unwrapped it; and the )
pearls lay in his hand they caught softly and fully the
light of the sun, and he laughed.

But O-lan returned to the beating of his clothes, and }
when tears dropped slowly and heavily from her eyes she
did not put up her hand to wipe them away; only she beat
the more steadily with her wooden stick upon the clothes
spread over the stone.



*53



XX



AND THUS IT MIGHT HAVE GONE ON UNTIL ALL THE
silver was spent, had not that one, Wang Lung's uncle
returned suddenly without explanation of where he had
been or of what he had done. He stood in the door as
though he had dropped from a cloud, his ragged clothes
unbuttoned and girdled loosely as ever about him, and his
face as it always was but wrinkled and hardened with the
sun and the wind. He grinned widely at them all as they
sat about the table at their early morning meal, and Wang
Lung sat agape, for he had forgotten that his uncle lived
and it was like a dead man returning to see him. The old
man, his father, blinked and stared and did not recognise
the one who had come until he called out:

'Well, Elder Brother and his son and his sons and my
sister-in-law.'

Then Wang Lung rose, dismayed in his heart, but upon
the surface of his face and voice courteous :

'Well, and my uncle and have you eaten?

c No,' replied his uncle easily, 'but I will eat with you.'

He sat himself down then, and he drew a bowl and
chopsticks to him and he helped himself freely to rice and
dried salt fish and to salted carrots and to the dried beans
that were upon the table. He ate as though he were very
hungry, and none spoke until he had supped down loudly
three bowls of the thin rice gruel, cracking quickly between
his teeth the bones of the fish and the kernels of the beans.
And when he had eaten he said simply and as though it
was his right:

'Now I will sleep, for I am without sleep these three
nights.'

Then when Wang Lung, dazed and not knowing what
else to do, led him to his father's bed, his uncle lifted the
quilts and felt of the good cloth and of the clean new cotton
and he looked at the wooden bedstead and at the good table
and at the great wooden chair which Wang Lung had
bought for his father's room, and he said :

'Well, and I heard you were rich but I did not know you



154



were as rich as this/ and he threw himself upon the bed
and drew the quilt about his shoulders, all warm with sum-
mer though it was, and everything he used as though it was
his own, an\i he was asleep without further speech.

Wang Lung went back to the middle room in great
consternation for he knew very well that his uncle would
never be driven forth again now that he knew Wang Lung
had wherewith to feed him. And Wang Lung thought of
this and thought of his uncle's wife with great fear because
he saw that they would come to his house and none could
stop them. '

As he feared, so it happened. His uncle stretched himself
upon the bed at last after noon had passed and he yawned
loudly three times and came out of the room, shrugging
the clothes together upon his body, and he said to Wang
Lung:

'Now I will fetch my wife and my son. There are the
three of us mouths, and in this great house of yours it will
never be missed what we eat and the poor clothes we wear/

Wang Lung could do nothing but answer with sullen
looks, for it is a shame to a man when he has enough
and to spare to drive his own father's brother and son from
the house. And Wang Lung knew that if he did this it
would be a shame to him in the village where he was now
respected because of his prosperity and so he did not dare
to say anything. But he commanded the labourers to move
altogether into the old house so that the rooms by the gate
might be left empty and into these that very day in the
evening his uncle came, bringing his wife and his son. And
Wang Lung was exceedingly angry and the more angry
because he must bury it all in his heart and answer with
smiles and welcome his relatives. This, although when he
saw the fat smooth face of his uncle's wife he felt fit to
burst with his anger, and when he saw the scampish, im-
pudent face of his uncle's son, he could scarcely keep his
hand down from slapping it! And for three days he did
not go into the town because of his anger.

Then when they were all accustomed to what had taken
place and when O-lan had said to him, 'Cease to be angry.
It is a thing to be borne,' and Wang Lung saw that his



155



uncle and his uncle's wife and son would be courteous
enough for the sake of their food and their shelter, then
his thoughts turned more violently than ever to the girl
Lotus and he muttered to himself:

'When a man's house is full of wild dogs he must seek
peace elsewhere.'

And all the old fever and pain burned in him and he
was still never satisfied of his love.

Now what O-lan had not seen in her simplicity nor the
old man because of the dimness of his age nor Ching be-
cause of his friendship, the wife of Wang Lung's uncle
saw at once and she cried out, the laughter slanting from
her eyes:

'Now Wang Lung is seeking to pluck a flower some-
where.' And when O-lan looked at her humbly, not un-
derstanding, she laughed and said again, 'The melon must
always be spilt wide open before you can see the seeds,
eh? Well, then, plainly, your man is mad over another
woman!'

This Wang Lung heard his uncle's wife say in the court
outside his window as he lay dozing and weary in his room
one early morning, exhausted with his love. He was quickly
awake, and he listened further, aghast at the sharpness of
this woman's eyes. The thick voice rumbled on, pouring
like oil from her fat throat.

'Well, and I have seen many a man, and when— one
smooths his hair and buys new clothes and will have his
shoes velvet all of a sudden, then there is a new woman
and that is sure.'

There came a broken sound from O-lan, what it was
she said he could not hear, but his uncle's wife said again :
^^And it is not to be thought, poor fool, that one woman
is enough for any man, and if that one is a weary hard-
working woman who has worn away her flesh working for
him, she is less than enough for him. His fancy runs else-
where the more cjuickly, and you, poor fool, have never
been fit for ; a man's fancy and little better than an ox for
his labour. And it is not for you to repine when he has
money and buys himself another to bring her to his house,
for all men are so, and so would my old do-nothing also,

i 5 6



except the poor wretch has never had enough silver in his
life to feed nimself even.'

This she s^id and more, but no mqre than this did Wang
Lung hear upon his bed, for his thought stopped at what
she had said. Now suddenly did he see how to satisfy his
hunger and his thirst after this girl he loved. He would
buy her and bring her to his house and make her his own
so that no other man could come in to her and so could he
eat and be fed and drink and be satisfied. And he rose up
at once from his bed and he went out and motioned secretly
to the wife of his uncle, and he said when she had followed
him outside the gate and under the date tree where none
could hear what he had to say :

'I listened and heard what you said in the courts, and
you are right. I have need of more than that one. And
why should I not, seeing that I have land to feed us all?'

She answered volubly and eagerly :

'And why not, indeed? So have all men who have pros-
pered. It is only the poor man who must needs drink from
one cup.' Thus she spoke, knowing what he would say
next, and he went on as she expected :

'But who will negotiate for me and be the middleman?
A man cannot go to a woman and say "come to my house''.'

To this she answered instantly:

'Nowjdo you leave this affair in my hands. Only tell
me which woman it is and I will manage the affair.'

Then Wang Lung answered unwillingly and timidly,
for he had never spoken her name aloud before to any one:

'It is the woman called Lotus.'

It seemed to him that every one must have heard of
Lotus, forgetting how only a short two summers' moons
before he had not known that she lived. He was impatient,
therefore, when his uncle's wife asked further:

'And where her home?'

'Now where,' he answered with asperity, 'Where except
in the great tea-shop on the main street of the town?'

'The one called the House of Flowers?'

'And what other?' Wang Lung retorted.

She mused awhile, fingering her pursed lower lip, and
she said at last:



157



'I do not know any one there. I shall have to find a
way. Who is the keeper of this woman?'

And when he told her it was Cuckoo, who had been
slave in the great house, she laughed and said:

'Oh, that one? Is that what she did after the old lord
died in her bed one night! Well, and it is what she would
do/

Then she laughed again, a crackling 'Heh — heh —
heh ' and she said easily:

'That one! But it is a simple matter, indeed. Everything
is plain. That one ! From the beginning that one would do
anything, even to making a mountain if she could feel silver
enough in her palm for it.'

And Wang Lung, hearing this, felt his mouth suddenly
dry and parched and his voice came from him in a whisper:

'Silver, then! Silver and gold! Anything to the very
price of my land!'

Then from a strange and contrary fever of love Wang
Lung would not go again to the great tea-house until the
affair was arranged. To himself he said:

'And if she will not come to my house and be for me
only, cut my throat and I will not go near her again.'

But when he thought the words, "if she will not come",
his heart stood still with fear, so that he continually ran to
his uncle's wife saying :

'Now, lack of money shall not close the gate.' And
he said again, 'Have you told Cuckoo that I have silver
and gold for my will?' and he said, 'Tell her she shall do
no work of any kind in my house but she shall wear only
silken garments and eat shark's fins if she will every day,'
until at last the fat woman grew impatient and cried out at
him, rolling her eyes back and forth:

'Enough and enough! Am I a fool, or is this the first
time I have managed a man and a maid? Leave me alone
and I will do it. I have said everything many times.'

Then there was nothing to do except to gnaw his fingers
and to see the house suddenly, as Lotus might see it and
he hurried O-lan into this and that, sweeping and washing
and moving tables and chairs, so that she, poor woman,

158



grew more and more terror-stricken, for well she knew by 1
now, although he said nothing, what was to come to her.

Now Wang Lung could not bear to sleep any more with
O-lan and he said to himself that with two women in the
house there must be more rooms and another court and
there must be a place where he could go with his love and
be separate. So while he waited for his uncle's wife to
complete the matter, he called his labourers, and commanded
them to build another court to the house behind the middle
room, and around the court three rooms, one large and
two small on either side. And the labourers stared at him,
but dared no reply and he would not tell them anything,
but he superintended them himself, so that he need not
talk with Ching even of what he did. And the men digged
the earth from the fields and made the walls and beat them
down, and Wang Lung sent to the town and bought tiles
for the roof.

Then when the rooms were finished and the earth smooth-
ed and beaten down for a floor, he had bricks bought
and the men set them closely together and welded them
with lime and there was a good brick floor to the three
rooms for Lotus. And Wang Lung bought red cloth to
hang at the doors for curtains and he bought a new table
and two carved chairs to put on either side and two painted
scrolls of pictured hills and water to hang upon the wall
behind the table.

And he bought a round red lacquered comfit dish with
a cover, and in this he jput sesame cakes and larded sweets
; and he put'tEeTJox on the table. Then he bought a wide
and deep carven be37big enough for a small room in itself,
land he bought flowered curtains to hang about it. But in
jail this he was ashamed to ask O-lan anything, and so in
the evenings his uncle's wife came in and she hung the
bed curtains and did the things a man is too clumsy to do.

Then all was finished and there was nothing to do, and
a moon of days had passed and the thing was not yet
complete. So Wang Lung dallied alone in the little new
court he had built for Lotus and he thought of a little pool
to make in the centre of the court, and he called a labourer
and the man dug a pool three feet square and set it about

'59

I



with tiles, and Wang Lung went into the city and bought
five goldfish for it. Then he could think of nothing more
to be done, and again he waited impatient and fevered.

T)uring all this time he said nothing to any one except to
scold the children if they were filthy at their noses or to roar
out at O-lan that she had not brushed her hair for three
days and more, so that at last one morning O-lan burst
into tears and wept aloud, as he had never seen her weep
before; even when they starved, or at any other time. He
said harshly, therefore:

'Now^ what, woman? Cannot I say comb out your
horse's tail of hair without this trouble over it?'

But she answered nothing except to say over and over,
moaning:

'I have borne you sons — I have borne you sons '

And he was silenced and uneasy acid muttered to himself,
for he was ashamed before her and so he let her alone.
It was true that before the law he had no complaint against
his wife, for she had borne him three good sons and they
were alive, and there was no excuse for him except his desire.

Thus it went until one day his uncle's wife came and
said:

'The thing is complete. The woman who is keeper for
the master of the tea-house will do it for a hundred pieces
of silver on her palm at one time, and the girl will come for
jade ea-rings and a ring of jade and a ring of gold and two
suits of satin clothes and two suits of silk clothes and a
dozen pairs of shoes and two silken quilts for her bed.'

Of all this Wang Lung heard only this part, 'The thing
is complete ' and he cried out :

'Let it be done — let it be done ' and he ran into

the inner room and he got out silver and poured it into
her hands, but secretly still, for he was unwilling that any
one should see the good harvests of so many years go thus,
and to his uncle's wife he said, 'And for yourself take a
good ten pieces of silver.'

Then she made a feint of refusal, drawing up her fat
body and rolling her head this way and that and crying in
a loud whisper:

'No, and I will not. We are one family and you are my

1 60



son and I afri your mother and this I do for you and not
for silver.' But Wang Lung saw her hand outstretched as
she denied, and into it he poured the good silver and he
counted it well spent.

Then he bought pork and beef and mandarin fish and
bamboo sprouts and chestnuts, and he bought a snarl of \
dried birds' nests from the south to brew for soup, and he
bought dried shark's fins and every delicacy he knew he
bought and then he waited — if that burning, restless im-
patience within him could be called a waiting.

On a shining, glittering, fiery day in the eighth moon,
which is the end of summer, she came to his house. From
afar Wang Lung saw her coming. She rode in a closed
sedan chair of bamboo borne upon men's shoulders and he
watched the sedan moving this way and that upon the
narrow paths skirting the fields, and behind it followed the
figure of Cuckoo. Then for an instant he knew fear and
he said to himself:

'What am I taking into my house?'

And scarcely knowing what he did he went quickly
into the room where he had slept for these many years
with his wife and he shut the door and there in the darkness
If the room he waited in confusion until he heard his
uncle's wife calling loudly for him to come out, for one[
was at the gate.

Then abashed and as though he had never seen the girl
before he went slowly out, hanging his head over his fine
clothes, and his eyes looking here and there but never
ahead. But Cuckoo hailed him merrily:

'Well, and I did not know we would be doing business
like this!'

Then she went to the chair which the men had set down
and she lifted the curtain and clucked her tongue and she
said:

'Come out, my Lotus Flower, here is your house and *
here your lord.'

And Wang Lung was in an agony because he saw upon
the faces of the chairmen wide grins of laughter and he
thought to himself:

161

5056, 11.



'Now these are loafers from the town streets and they
are worthless fellows,' and he was angry that he felt his
face hot and red and so he would not speak aloud at all.

Then the curtain was lifted and before he knew what
he did he looked and he saw sitting in the shadowy recess
of the chair, painted and cool as a lily, the girl Lotus. He
forgot everything, even his anger against the grinning
fellows from the town, everything but that he had bought
this woman for his own and she had come to his house
for ever, sind he stood stiff and trembling, watching as
she rose, graceful as though a wind had passed over a
flower. Then as he watched and could not take his eyes
away, she took Cuckoo's hand and stepped out, keeping >
her head bowed and her eyelids dropped as she walked,
tottering and swaying upon her little feet, and leaning upon
Cuckoo. And as she passed him she did not speak to him,
but she whispered only to Cuckoo, faintly:

'Where is my apartment?'

Then his uncle's wife came forward to her other side j
and between them they led the girl into the court and into !
the new rooms that Wang Lung had built for her. And of
all Wang Lung's house there was none to see her pass, for j
he had sent the labourers and Ching away for the day to j
work on a distant field, and O-lan had gone somewhere he
knew not and had taken the two little ones with her and
the boys were in school and the old man slept against the
wall and heard and saw nothing, and as for the poor fool, j
she saw no one who came and went and knew no face
except her father's and her mother's. But when Lotus had
gone in Cuckoo drew the curtains after her. j

Then after a time Wang Lung's uncle's wife came out,
laughing a little maliciously, and she dusted her hands
together as though to free them of something that clung
to them.

'She reeks of perfume and paint, that one,' she said still
laughing, 'Like a regular bad one she smells.' And then
she said with a deeper malice, 'She is not so young as she i \
looks, my nephew ! I will dare to say this, that if she had \
not been on the edge of an age when men will cease soon j j
to look at her, it is doubtful whether jade in her ears and hi

162 J

■



gold on her tingers and even silk and satin would have
tempted her to the house of a farmer, and even a well-to-
do farmer/ And then seeing the anger on Wang Lung's
face at this too plain speaking she added hastily, 'But beau-
tiful she is and I have never seen another more beautiful
and it will be as sweet as the eight jewelled rice at a feast
after your years with the thick-boned slave from the House
of Hwang.'

But Wang Lung answered nothing, only he moved here
and there through the house and he listened and he could
not be still. At last he dared to lift the red curtain and to
go into the court he had built for Lotus and then into
the darkened room where she was and there he was beside
her for the whole day until night. ^

All this time O-lan had not come near the house. At
dawn she had taken a hoe from the wall and she called the
children and she took a little cold food wrapped up in
a cabbage leaf and she had not returned. But when night
came on she entered, silent and earth-stained and dark
with weariness, and the children silent behind her, and she
said nothing to any one, but she went into the kitchen and I
prepared food and set it upon the table as she always did,
and she called the old man and put the chopsticks in his
hand and she fed the poor fool and then she ate a little
with the children. Then when they slept and Wang Lung
still sat at the table dreaming she washed herself for sleeping >
and at last she went into her accustomed room and slept
alone' upon her bed.

Then did Wang Lung eat and drink of his love night
and day. Day after day he went into the room where Lotus
| lay indolent upon her bed and he sat beside her and watched
i her at all she did. She never came forth in the heat of the
early autumn days, but she- lay while the woman Cuckoo
bathed her slender body with lukewarm water and rubbed
oil into her flesh and perfume and oil into her hair. For
Lotus had said wilfully that Cuckoo must stay with her
as her servant and she paid her prodigally so that the woman
was willing enough to serve one instead of a score, and she
and Lotus, her mistress, dwelt apart from the others in the
new court that Wang Lung had made.

i6 3



All day the girl lay in the cool darkness of her room,
nibbling sweetmeats and fruits, and wearing nothing but
single garments of green summer silk, a little tight coat cut
to her waist and wide trousers beneath, and thus Wang
Lung found her when he came to her and he ate and drank
of his love.

Then at sunset she sent him away with her pretty petu-
lance, and Cockoo bathed and perfumed her again and
put on her fresh clothes, soft white silk against her flesh
and peach-coloured silk outside, the silken garments that
Wang Lung had given, and upon her feet Cuckoo put
small embroidered shoes, and then the girl walked into the
court and examined the little pool with its five goldfish,
and Wang Lung stood and stared at the wonder of what
he had. She swayed upon her little feet and to Wang Lung
there was nothing so wonderful for beauty in the world as
her pointed little feet and her curling helpless hands.

And he ate and drank of his love and he feasted alone,
and he was satisfied.

XXI

IT WAS NOT TO BE SUPPOSED THAT THE COMING
of this one called Lotus and of her serving-woman
Cuckoo into Wang Lung's house could be accomplished
altogether without stir and discord of some sort, since,
more than one woman under one roof is not for peace.
But Wang Lung had not foreseen it. And even though he
saw by O-lan's sullen looks and Cuckoo's sharpness that
something was amiss, he would not pay heed to it and he
was careless of any one so long as he was still fierce with
his desire.

Nevertheless, when day passed into night, and night,
changed into dawn, Wang Lung saw. that it was true the
sun rose in the morning, and this woman Lotus was there,
and the moon rose in its season and she was there for his
hand to grasp when it would, and his thirst of love was
somewhat slaked and he saw things he had not seen before.*

For one thing, he saw that there was trouble at once
between O-lan and Cuckoo. This was an astonishment to



164



him, for he was\prepared for O-lan to hate Lotus, having
heard many times of such things, and some women will
even hang themselves upon a beam with a rope when a
man takes a second woman into the house, and others will
scold and contrive to make his life worthless for what he ,
has done, and he was glad that O-lan was a silent woman, \
for at least she could not think of words against him. But
he had not foreseen that whereas she would be silent of
Lotus, her anger would find its vent against Cuckoo.

Now Wang Lung had thought only of Lotus and when
she begged him:

'Let me have this woman for my servant, seeing thaf^
I am altogether alone in the world, for my father and my
mother died when I could not yet walk and my uncle sold
me as soon as I was pretty to a life such as I have had,
and I have no one.'

This she said with her tears, always abundant and ready
and glittering in the corners of her pretty eyes, and Wang
Lung could have denied her nothing she asked when she
looked up at him so. Besides, it was true enough that the
girl had no one to serve her, and it was true she would be
alone in his house, for it was plain enough and to be
expected that O-lan would not serve the second one, and
she would not speak to her or notice that she was in the
house at all. There was only the uncle of Lotus then, and
it was against Wang Lung's stomach to have that one
peeping and prying and near to Lotus for her to talk to
of him, and so Cuckoo was as good as any and he knew
no other woman who would come. — .

But it seemed that O-lan, when she saw T Cuckoo, grew )
angry with a deep and sullen anger that Wang Lung had /
never seen and did not know was in her. Cuckoo was
willing enough to be friends, since she had her pay from
Wang Lung, albeit she did not forget that in the great house
she had been in the lord's chamber and O-lan a kitchen slave
and one of many. Nevertheless, she called out to O-lan
well enough when first she saw her :

'Well, and my old friend, here we are in a house together I
again, and you mistress and first wife — my mother — and
how things are changed!'



i6 5



But O-lan only stared at her and when it came into
her understanding who it was and what she was, she
answered nothing but she put down the jar of water she
carried and she went into the middle room where Wang
Lung sat between his times of love, and she said to him
plainly :

'What is this slave woman doing in our house?'

Wang Lung looked east and west. He would have liked
to speak out and to say in a surly voice of master, 'Well,
and it is my house and whoever I say may come in, she
shall come in, and who are you to ask?' But he could
not because of some shame in him when O-lan was there
before him, and his shame made him angry, because when
he reasoned it, there was no need for shame and he had
done no more than any man may do who has silver to spare.

Still, he could not speak out, and he only looked east
and west and feigned to have mislaid his pipe in his
garments, and he fumbled in his girdle. But O-lan stood
there solidly on her big feet and waited and when he said
nothing she asked again plainly in the same words:

'What is this slave woman doing in our house?'

Then Wang Lung, seeing she would have an answer
said feebly:

'And what is it to you?'

And O-lan said:

'I bore her haughty looks all during my youth in the
great house and her running into the kitchen a score of
times a day and crying out "now tea for the lord" — "now
food for the lord" — and it was always this is too hot and
that is too cold, and that is badly cooked, and I was too
ugly and too slow and too this and too that . . .'

But still Wang Lung did not answer, for he did not
know what to say.

Then O-lan waited and when he did riot speak, the
hot scanty tears welled slowly into her eyes, and she
winked them to hold back the tears, and at last she took
the corner of her blue apron and wiped her eyes and she
said at last:

'It is a bitter thing in my own house, and I have no
mother's house to go back to anywhere.'

1 66



And when Wang Lung was still silent and answered
nothing at all, but he sat down to his pipe and lit it, and
he said nothing still, she looked at him piteously and sadly
out of her strange dumb eyes that were like a beast's- eyes
that cannot speak, and then she went away, creeping and
feeling for the door because of her tears that blinded her.

Wang Lung watched her as she went and he was glad
to be alone, but still he was ashamed and he was still
angry that he was ashamed and he said to himself and he
muttered the words aloud and restlessly, as though he
quarrelled with some one:

'Well, and other men are so and I have been good
enough to her, and there are men worse than I.' And he
said at last that O-lan must bear it.

But O-lan was not finished with it, and she went her
way silently. In the morning she heated water and pre-
sented it to the old man, and to Wang Lung if he were
not in the inner court she presented tea, but when Cuckoo
went to find hot water for her mistress the cauldron was
empty and not all her loud questionings would stir any.
response from O-lan. Then there was nothing but that
Cuckoo must herself boil water for her mistress if she would
have it. But then it was time to stir the morning gruel
and there was not space in the cauldron for more water
and O-lan would go steadily to her cooking, answering
nothing to Cuckoo's loud crying:

c And is my delicate lady to lie thirsting and gasping in
her bed for a swallow of water in the morning?'

But O-lan would not hear her; only she pushed more grass
and straw into the bowels of the oven, spreading it as
carefully and as thriftily as ever she had in the old days
when one leaf was precious enough because of the fire it
would make under food. Then Cuckoo went complaining
loudly to Wang Lung and he was angry that his love must
be marred by such things and he went to O-lan to reproach
her and he shouted at her:

'And cannot you add a dipperful of water to the cauldron
in the mornings?'

But she answered with a sullenness deeper than ever
upon her face:

167



' 'I am not slave of slaves in this house at least.'

r Then he was angry beyond bearing and he seized O-lan's

shoulder and he shook her soundly and he said:

| 'Do not be yet more of a fool. It is not for the servant

but for the mistress.'

And she bore his violence and she looked at him and
she said simply:

I 'And to that one you gave my two pearls!'
I Then his hand dropped and he was speechless and his
^nger was gone and he. went away ashamed and he said
!to Cuckoo:

f 'We will build another stove and I will make another
ikitchen. The first wife knows nothing of the delicacies
which the other one needs for her flower-like body and
which you also enjoy. You shall cook what you please
in it.'

And so he bade the labourers build a little room and
an earthen stove in it and he bought a good cauldron.
And Cuckoo was pleased because he said, 'You shall cook
what you please in it.'

As for Wang Lung, he said to himself that at last his
affairs were settled and his women at peace and he could
enjoy his love. And it seemed to him freshly that he could
never tire of Lotus and of the way she pouted at him with
the lids dropped like lily petals over her great eyes, and at
the way laughter gleamed out of her eyes when she glanced
up at him.

But after all this matter of the new kitchen became a
thorn in his body, for Cuckoo went to the town every day
and she bought this and that of expensive foods , that are
imported from the southern cities. There were foods he had
never even heard of: lichee nuts and dried honey dates
and curious cakes of rice flour and nuts and red sugar,
and horned fish from the sea and many other things. And
these all cost money more than he liked to give out, but
still not so much, he was sure, as Cuckoo told him, and
yet he was afraid to say, 'You are eating my flesh,' for
fear she would be offended and angry at him, and it would
displease Lotus, and so there was nothing he could do ex-
cept to put his hand unwillingly to his girdle. And this

168



was a thorn to him day after day, and because there was
none to whom he could complain of it, the thorn pierced
more deeply continually, and it cooled a little of the fire
of love in him for Lotus.



And there was yet another small thorn that sprang j
from the first, and it was that his uncle's wife, who loved
good food, went often into the inner court at meal times,
and she grew free there, and Wang Lung was not pleased
that out of his house Lotus chose this woman for friend.
The three women ate well in the inner courts, and they
talked unceasingly, whispering and laughing, and there was
something that Lotus liked in the wife of his uncle and the
three were happy together, and this Wang Lung did not
like.

But still there was nothing to be done, for when he
said gently and to coax her:

'Now, Lotus, my flower, and do not waste your sweet-
ness on' an old fat hag like that one. I need it for my own
heart, and she is a deceitful and untrustworthy creature,
and I do not like it that she is near you from dawn to
sunsefT^ Lotus was fretful and she answered peevishly,
pouting her lips and hanging her head away from him:

'Now and I have no one except you and I have no
friends and I am used to a merry house and in yours
there is no one except the first wife who hates me and these
children of yours who are a plague to me, and I have
no oner 2 ""

Then she used her weapons against him and she would
not let him into her room that night and she complained
and said:

'You do not love me, for if you did you would wish
me to be happy.

Then Wang Lung was humbled and anxious and he
was submissive and he was sorry and he said:

'Let it be only as you wish and for ever/

Then she forgave him royally and he was afraid to
rebuke her in any way for what she wished to do, and
after that when he came to her Lotus, if she were talking or
drinking tea or eating some sweetmeat with his uncles'
jwife, would bid him wait and was careless with him, and




he strode away, angry that she was unwilling for him to
come in when this other woman sat there, and his love
cooled a little, although he did not know it himself.

He was angry, moreover, that his uncles's wife ate of the
rich foods that he had to buy for Lotus and that she grew
fat and more oily than she had been, but he could say
nothing, for his uncle's wife was clever and she was
courteous to him and flattered him with good words and
rose when he came into the room.

And so his love for Lotus was not whole and perfect
as it had been before, absorbing utterly his mind and his
body. It was pierced through and through with small
angers which were the more sharp because they must be
endured and because he could no longer go even to O-lan
freely for speech, seeing that now their life was sundered.

Then like a field of thorns springing up from one root
and spreading here and there, there was yet more to trouble
Wang Lung. One day his father, whom one would say saw
nothing at any time so drowsy with age he was, woke sud-
denly out of his sleeping in the sun and he tottered, lean-
ing on his dragon-headed staff which Wang Lung had
bought for him on his seventieth birthday, to the doorway
where a curtain hung between the main room and the court
where Lotus walked. Now the old man had never noticed
the door before, nor when the court was built, and seem-
ingly he did not know whether any one had been added
to the house or not, and Wang Lung had never told him,
"I have another woman," for the old man was too deaf to
make anything out of a voice if it told him something new
and of which he had not thought.

But on this day he saw without reason this doorway
and he went to it and drew the curtain, and it happened
that it was at an hour of evening when Wang Lung walked
with Lotus in the court, and they stood beside the pool
and looked at the fish, but Wang Lung looked at Lotus.
Then when the old man saw his son standing beside a
slender painted girl he cried out in his shrill cracked voice.

'There is a harlot in the house!' and he would not be
silent although Wang Lung, fearing lest Lotus grow angry
— for this small creature could shriek and scream and beat



170



her hands together if she were angered at all — went forward
aiidTledtBe old man away into the outer court and soothed
him, saying:

'Now calm your heart, my father. It is not a harlot
but a second woman in the house.'

But the old man would not be silent and whether he
heard what was said or not no one knew, only he shouted
over and over. c There is a harlot here !' And he said suddenly
seeing Wang Lung near him, 'And I had one woman
and my father had one woman and we farmed the land.*
And again he cried out after a time, 'I say it is a harlot!'

And so the old man woke from his aged and fitful sleeping
with a sort of cunning hatred against Lotus. He would go
to the doorway of her court and shout suddenly into the air :

'Harlot!'

Or he would draw aside the curtain into her court and
then spit furiously upon the tiles. And he would hunt
small stones and throw them with his feeble arm into the
little pool to scare the fish, and in the mean ways of a
mischievous child he expressed his anger.

And this too made a disturbance in Wang Lung's house,
for he was ashamed to rebuke his father, and yet he feared
the anger of Lotus, since he had found, she had a pretty
petulant temper that she loosed easily. And this anxiety to
keep his father from angering her was wearisome to him and
it was another thing to make of his love a burden to him.

One day he heard a shriek from the inner courts and
he ran in" for he heard it was the voice of Lotus, and there
he found that the two younger children, the boy and the
girl born alike, had between them led into the inner court
his elder daughter, his poor fool. Now the four other
children were constantly curious about this lady who lived
in the inner court, but the two elder boys were conscious
and shy and knew well enough why she was there and what
their father had to do with her, although they never spoke
of her unless to each other secretly. But the two younger
ones could never be satisfied with their peepings and their
exclamations, and sniffing of the perfume she wore and
dipping their fingers into the bowls of food that Cuckoo
carried away from her rooms after she had eaten.

17*



Lotus complained many times to Wang Lung that his
children were a plague to her and she wished there were a
way to lock them out so that she need not be plagued with
them. But this he was not willing to do, and he answered
her in jest:

'Well, and they like to look at a lovely face as much
as their father does.'

And he did nothing except to forbid them to enter her
courts and when he saw them they did not, but when he
did not see them they ran in and out secretly. But the |
elder daughter knew nothing of anything, but only sat in |
the sun against the wall of the outer court, smiling and I
playing with her bit of twisted cloth.

On this day, however, the two elder sons being away I
at school, the two younger children had conceived the
notion that the fool must also see the lady in the inner
courts, and they had taken her hands and dragged her into
the court and she stood before Lotus, who had never seen
her and sat and stared at her. Now when the fool saw the
bright silk of the coat Lotus wore and the shining jade in
her ears, she was moved by some strange joy at the sight
and she put put her hands to grasp the bright colours and
she laughed aloud, a laugh that was only sound and
meaningless. And Lotus was frightened and screamed out,
so that Wang Lung came running in, and Lotus shook with
her anger and leaped up and down on her little feet and
shook her finger at the poor laughing girl and cried out:

'I w r ill not stay in this house if that one comes near
me, and I was not told that I should have accursed idiots
to endure and if I had known it I would not have come —
filthy children of yours!' and she pushed the little gaping
boy who stood nearest her, clasping his twin sister's hand.

Then the good anger awoke in Wang Lung for he
loved his children, and he said roughly:

'Now I will not hear my children cursed, no and not
by any one and not even my poor fool, and not by you
who have no son in your womb for any man.' And he
gathered the children together and said to them: 'Now go
out, my son and my daughter, and come no more to this
woman's court, for she does not love you if she does



172



not loyeyou she does not love your father, either/ And to
the elder girl he said with great gentleness: c And you, my
poor fool, come back to your place in the sun.' And she

ismilee! and he took her by the hand and led her away.
For he was most angry of all that Lotus dared to curse

I this child of his and call her idiot, and a load of fresh
pain for the girl fell upon his heart, so that for a day and

itwo days he would not go near Lotus, but he played with

I the children and he went into the town and he bought a
circle of barley candy for his poor fool and he comforted
himself with her baby pleasure in the sweet sticky stuff.
And when he went in to Lotus again neither of them

! said anything that he had not come for two days, but she
took special trouble to please him, for when he came his
uncle's wife was there drinking tea, and Lotus excused her-
self and said:

'Now here is my lord come for me and I must be
obedient to him for this is my pleasure,' and she stood
until the woman went away.

Then she went up to Wang Lung and took his hand
and drew it to her face and she wooed him. But he, although
he loved her again, loved her not so wholly as before,
and never again so wholly as he had loved her.

There came a day when summer was ended and the
sky in the early morning was clear and cold and blue as
sea water and a clean autumn wind blew hard over the
land, and Wang Lung woke as from a sleep. He went to
the door of his house and he looked over his fields. And
he saw T that the waters had receded and the land lay shi-
ning under the dry cold wind and under the ardent sun.

Then a voice cried out in him, a voice deeper than
love cried out in him for his land. And he heard it above
every other voice in his life and he tore off the long robe
he wore and he stripped off his velvet shoes and his white
stockings and he rolled his trousers to his knees and he
stood forth robust and eager and he shouted:

'Where is the hoe and where the plough? And where
is the seed for the wheat planting? Come, Ching, my
friend — come — call the men — I go out to the land!'



173



XXII



AS HE HAD BEEN HEALED OF HIS SICKNESS OF HEART
when he came from the southern city and comforted by
the bitterness he had endured there, so now again Wang
Lung was healed of his sickness of love by the good dark
earth of his fields and he felt the moist soil on his feet and he
smelled the earthy fragrance rising up out of the furrows
he turned for the wheat. He ordered his labourers hither
and thither and they did a mighty day of labour, ploughing
here and ploughing there, and Wang Lung stood first be-
hind the oxen and cracked the whip over their backs and
! saw the deep curl of earth turning as the plough went into
the soil, and then he called to Ching and gave him the
ropes, and he himself took a hoe and broke up the soil
into fine loamy stuff, soft as black sugar, and still dark
with the wetness of the land upon it. This he did for the
sheer joy he had in it and not for any necessity, and when
he was weary he lay down upon his land he slept and
the health of the earth spread into his flesh and he was
healed of his sickness.

When night came and the sun had gone blazing down
without a cloud to dim it, he strode into his house, his body
aching and weary and triumphant, and he tore aside the
curtain that went into the inner court and there Lotus
walked in her silken robes. When she saw him she cried
out at the earth upon his clothes and shuddered when he
came near her.

■ But he laughed and he seized her small, curling hands
in his soiled ones and he laughed again and said:
f"~ 'Now you see that your lord is but a farmer and you
are a farmer's wife!'

Then she cried out with spirit :

'A farmer's wife I am not, be you what you like!'

And he laughed again and went out from her easily.

He ate his evening rice all stained as he was with the earth
and unwillingly he washed himself even before he slept.
And washing his body he laughed again, for he washed it
now for no woman, and he laughed because he was free.



*74



Then it seemed to Wang Lung as though he had been
for a long time away and there were suddenly a multitude
of things he had to do. The land clamoured for ploughing
and planting and day after day he laboured at it, and the
paleness which the summer of his love had set on his flesh
darkened to a deep brown under the sun, and his hands,
which had peeled off their calloused parts under the idle-
ness of love, hardened again where the hoe pressed and
where the plough handles set their mark.

When he came in at noon and at night he ate well of
the food which O-lan prepared for him, good rice and cab-
bage and bean-curd, and good garlic rolled into wheat
bread. When Lotus held her small nose under her hand
at his coming and cried out at his reek, he laughed and
cared nothing and he breathed out his stout breath at her
and she must bear it as she could for he would eat of
what he liked. And now that he was full of health again
and free of the sickness of his love he could go to her
and be finished with her and turn himself to other things.

^So these two women took their place in his house:
Lotus for his toy and his pleasure and to satisfy his delight
in beauty and in smallness and in the joy of her pure sex, /
and O-lan for his woman of work and the mother who had
borne his sons and who kept his house and fed him and
his father and his children!} And it was a pride to Wang
jLung in the village that men mentioned with envy the
woman in his inner court; it was as though men spoke of
a rare jewel or an expensive toy that was useless except
I that it was sign and symbol of a man who had passed
beyond the necessity of caring only to be fed and clothed
and could spend his money on joy if he wished.

And foremost among the men in the village who ex-
claimed over his prosperity was his uncle, for his uncle in
these days was like a dog who fawns and desires to win
favour. He said:

'There is my nephew, who keeps such an one for his
pleasure as none of we common men have even seen.'
And again he said: 'And he goes in to his woman, who
wears robes of silk and satin like a lady in a great house.
I have not seen it, but my woman tells me.' And again



175



he said: 'My nephew, the son of my brother, is founding
a great house and his sons will be the sons of a rich man
and they need not work all their lives long.'
\ The men of the village, therefore, looked upon W ang
Lung with increasing respect and they talked to him no
more as to one of themselves but as to one who lived in a
great house, and they came to borrow money of him at
interest and to ask his advice concerning the marriage of
their sons and daughters, and if any two had a dispute
over the boundary of a field, Wang Lung was asked to
settle the dispute, and his decision was accepted whatever
it was. 7

Where Wang Lung had been busy with his love, then,
he was now satisfied of it and was busied with many
things. The rains came in season and the wheat sprouted
and grew and the year turned to winter and Wang Lung
took his harvest to the markets, for he saved his grain
until prices were high, and this time he took with him his
eldest son.

Now there is" a pride a man has when he sees his eldest
son reading aloud the letters upon a paper and putting
the brush and ink to paper and writing that which may
be read by others, and this pride W'ang Lung now' had.
He stood proudly and saw this happen and he would not
laugh when the clerks, who had scorned him before, now
cried out:

'Pretty characters the lad makes and he is a clever one!'

No, Wang Lung would not pretend it was anything out
of the common that he had a son like this, although when
the lad said sharply as he read: 'Here is a letter that has
the wood radical when it should have the water radical,'
Wang Lung's heart was fit to burst with pride, so that he
was compelled to turn aside and cough and spit upon the
floor to save himself. And when a murmur of surprise ran
among the clerks at his son's wisdom he called out merely :

'Change it then! We will not put our name to any-
thing wrongly written.'

And he stood proudly and watched while his son took
up the brush and changed the mistaken sign.

When it was finished and his son had written his father's



176



name on/the deed of sale of the grain and upon the receipt
of the rrioneys, the two walked home together, father and
son, ana the father said within his heart that now his son ]
was a man and his eldest son, and he must do what was
right for his son, and he must see to it that there was a
wife chosen and betrothed for his son so that the lad need
not go begging into a great house as he had and pick
up what was left and what no one wanted, for his son was
the son of a man who was rich and who owned land in
his right.

Wang_Lung set himself, therefore, to the seeking of a
mai J who might be his son's wife, and it was no slight
task, for he would have no one who was a common and
ordinary female. He talked of it one night to Ching, after
the two of them had been alone in the middle room taking
account of what must be bought for spring planting and of
what they had of their own seed. He talked not as one
who expects great help, for he knew Ching was too simple,
but still he knew the man was faithful as a good dog is
faithful to its master, and it was relief to speak what he
thought to such an one.

Ching stood humbly as Wang Lung sat at the table
and spoke, for in spite of Wang Lung's urging, he would
not, now that W r ang Lung had become rich, sit in his pre-
sence as though they were equal, and he listened with fixed
attention as Wang Lung spoke of his son and of the one
he sought, and when Wang Lung was finished, Ching sighed
and he said in his hesitant voice that was scarcely more
than a whisper:

'And if my poor girl were here and sound you might
have her for nothing at all and my gratitude, too, but
where she is I do not know, and it may be she is dead
and I do not know.'

Then Wang Lung thanked him, but he forebore to say
what was in his heart, that for his son there must be one
far higher than the daughter of such a one as Ching, who
although a good man was, besides that, only a common
farmer on another's land.

Wang Lung kept his own counsel, therefore, only listen-
ing here and there in the tea-shop when maids were spoken

177

5056, 12.



of, or men prosperous in the town who had daughters for
marriage. But to his. uncle's wife he said nothing, guard-
ing his purpose from her. For she was well enough when
he had need of a woman from a tea-house for himself.
She was such an one to arrange a matter like that. But
for his son he would have no one like his uncle's wife, who
could not know any one he considered fit for his eldest
son.

The year deepened into snow and the bitterness of
winter and the New Year's festival came and they ate and
drank, and men came to see Wang Lung, not only from
the countryside but now from the town also, to wish him
fortune, and they said:

■IT* Well, and there is no fortune we can wish you greater
than you have, sons in your house and women and money
and land.' ~f

And Wang Lung, dressed in his silken robe, with his
sons in good robes beside him on either- hand, and sweet
cakes and watermelon seeds and nuts upon the table, and
red paper signs pasted upon his doors everywhere for the
New Year and coming prosperity, knew that his fortune
was good.

But the year turned to spring and the willows grew
faintly green and the peach trees budded pink, and Wang
Lung had not yet found the one he sought for his son.

Spring came in long, warm days scented with blossom-
ing plum and cherry, and the willow trees sprouted their
leaves fully and unfolded them, and the trees were green
and the earth was moist and steaming and pregnant with
harvest, and the eldest son of Wang Lung changed suddenly
and- ceased to be a child. He grew moody and petulant
and would not eat this and that and he wearied of his books,
and Wang Lung was frightened and did not know what
to make of it and talked of a doctor.

There was no correction that could be made of the
lad at all, for if his father said to him with anything beyond
coaxing, "Now eat of the good meat and rice,' the lad
turned stubborn and melancholy, and if Wang Lung was
angry at all, he burst into tears and fled from the room.

Wang Lung was overcome with surprise and he could

i 7 8



make nothing of it, so that he went after the lad and he
said gently as he was able:

'I am your father and now tell me what is in your heart.'
But the lad did nothing except sob and shake his head
violently.

Moreover, he took a dislike to his old teacher and
would not in the mornings rise out of his bed to go to
school unless Wang Lung bawled at him or even beat him,
and then he went sullenly and sometimes he spent whole
days idling about the streets of the town, and Wang Lung
only knew it at night, when the younger boy said spite-
fully:

'Elder Brother was not in school to-day.'

Wang Lung was angry at his eldest son then and he
shouted at him:

c And am I to spend good silver for nothing?'

And in his anger he fell upon the boy with a bamboo
and beat him until O-lan, the boy's mother, heard it and
rushed in from the kitchen and stood between her son (
and his father so that the blows rained upon her in spite
of Wang Lung's turning this way and that to get at the
boy. Now the strange thing was that whereas the boy
might burst into weeping at a chance rebuke, he stood
these beatings under the bamboo without a sound, his
face carven and pale as an image. And Wang Lung could
make nothing of it, although he thought of it night and day.

He thought of it one evening thus after he had eaten
his night's food, because on that day he had beaten his
eldest son for not going to the school, and while he thought, y
O-lan came into the room. She came in silently and she
stood before Wang Lung and he saw she had that which
she wished to say. So he said:

'Say on. What is it, mother of my son?'

And she said, 'It is useless for you to beat the lad as
you do. I have seen this thing come upon the young
lords in the courts of the great house, and it came on them ]
melancholy, and when it came the Old Lord found slaves i
for them if they had not found any for themselves and the I
thing passed easily.'

'Now and it need not be so,' answered Wang Lung



179



in argument. 'When I was a lad I had no such melan-
choly and no such weepings and tempers, and no slaves
either.'

O-lan waited and then she answered slowly, 'I have not
indeed seen it thus except with young lords. You worked
on the land. But he is like a young lord and he is idle in the
house.' * t ,

Wang Lung was surprised, after he had pondered a while,
for he saw truth in what she said. It was true that when
he himself was a lad there was no time for melancholy,
for he had to be up at dawn for the ox and out with the
plough and the hoe and at harvest he must needs work
until his back broke, and if he wept he could weep, for
no one heard him, and he could not run away as his son
ran away from school, for if he did there was nothing for
him to eat on return, and so he was compelled to labour.
He remembered all this and he said to himself:

'But my son is not thus. He is more delicate than I was,
and his father is rich and mine was poor, and there is no
need for his labour, for I have labour in my fields, and
besides, one cannot take a scholar such as my son is and
set him to the plough.'

And he was secretly proud that he had a son like this
. and so he said to O-lan:

' Well, and if he is like a young lord it is another matter.
But I cannot buy a slave for him. I will betroth him and
we will marry him early, and there is that to be done.'

Then he rose and went into the inner court.



XXIII

NOW LOTUS, SEEING WANG LUNG DISTRAUGHT IN
her presence and thinking of things other than her beauty,
pouted and said:

'If I had known that in a short year you could look
at me and not see me, I would have stayed in the tea-house.'
And she turned her head away as she spoke and looked at
him out of the corner of her eyes so that he laughed and

180



seized her \ hand and he put it against his face and smelled j
of its fragrance and he answered : _J

' Well, and a man cannot always think of the jewel he
has sewn on his coat, but if it were lost he could not bear
•it. These days I think of my eldest son and of how his
blood is restless with desire and he must be wed and I do
hot know how to find the one he should wed. I am not
willing that he marry any of the daughters of the village
farmers, nor is it meet, seeing that we bear the common
name of Wang. Yet I do not know one in the town well
enough to say to him, "here is my son and there is your
daughter," and I am loath to go to a professional match-
maker, lest there be some bargain she had made with a
man who has a daughter deformed or idiot.'

Now Lotus, since the eldest son had grown tall and
graceful with young manhood, looked on the lad with fa-
vour and she was diverted with what Wang Lung said to
her and she replied, musing:

'There was a man who used to come in to me at the
great tea-house, and he often spoke of his daughter, be-
cause he said she was such an one as I, small and fine,
but still only a child, and he said, "And I love you with a
strange unease as though you were my daughter; you are
too like her, and it troubles me for it is not lawful," and
for this reason, although he loved me best, he went to a
great red girl called Pomegranate Flower.'

'What sort of man was this?' asked Wang Lung.

'He was a good man and his silver was ready and he 1
did not promise without paying. We all wished him well,
for he was not begrudging, and if a girl was weary some- f
times he did not bawl out as some did that he had been
cheated, but he always said courteously as might a prince
or might some from a learned and noble house, "Well, and
here is the silver, and rest, my child, until love blooms
again." He spoke very prettily to us.' And Lotus mused
until Wang Lung said hastily to waken her, for he did not
like her to think on her old life:

'What was his business, then, with all this silver?'

And she answered:

'Now and I do not know but I think he was master of

181



a grain market, but I will ask Cuckoo who knows every-
thing about men and their money.'

Then she clapped her hands and Cuckoo ran in from
the kitchen, her high cheeks and nose flushed with the fire,
and Lotus asked her:

'Who was that great, large, goodly man who came to
me and then to Pomegranate Flower, because I was like
his little daughter, so that it troubled him, though he ever
loved me best?'

And Cuckoo answered at once, 'Ah, and that was Liu,
the grain dealer. Ah, he was a good m?n! He left silver
in my palm whenever he saw me.'

'Where is his market?' asked Wang Lung, although idly,
because it was woman's talk and likely to come to nothing.

'In the street of the Stone Bridge,' said Cuckoo.

Then before she finished the words Wang Lung struck
his hands together in delight and he said:

'Now then, that is where I sell my grain, and it is a
propitious thing and surely it can be done,' and for the
first time his interest was awake, because it seemed to him
a lucky thing to wed his son to the daughter of the man
who bought his grain.

W r hen there was a .thing to be done, Cuckoo smelled
the money in it as a rat smells tallow, and she wiped her
hands upon her apron and she said quickly :

'I am ready to serve the master.'

Wang Lung was doubtful, and doubting, he looked at
her crafty face, but Lotus said gaily:

'And that is true, and Cuckoo shall go and ask the man
Liu, and he knows her well and the thing can be done, for
Cuckoo is clever enough, and if it is well done she shall
have the matchmaker's fee.'

'That will I do!' said Cuckoo heartily and she laughed
as she thought of the fee of good silver on her palm, and
she untied her apron from her waist and she said busily,
'Now and at once will I go, for the meat is ready except
for the moment of cooking and the vegetables are washed.'

But Wang Lung had not pondered the matter sufficient-
ly and it was not to be decided so quickly as this and he
called out :



182



'No, and I have decided nothing. I must think of the
matter for some days and I will tell you what I think.'

The women were impatient, Cuckoo for the silver and
Lotus because it was a new thing and she would hear
something new to amuse her: but Wang Lung went out,
saying :

c No, it is my son and I will wait.'

And so he might have waited for many days, thinking
of this and that, had not the lad, his eldest son, come
home one day in the dawn with his face hot and red with
wine drinking, and his breath was fetid and his feet un-
steady. Wang Lung heard him stumbling in the court and
he ran out to see who it was, and the lad was sick and
vomited before him, for he was unaccustomed to more
than the pale mild wine they made from their own rice
fermented, and he fell and lay on the ground in his vomit
like a dog.

Wang Lung was frightened and he called for O-lan, and
together they lifted the lad up and O-lan washed him and
laid him upon the bed in her own room, and before she
was finished with him the lad was asleep and heavy as one
dead and could answer nothing to what his father asked.

Then Wang Lung went into the room where the two
boys slept together, and the younger was yawning and
stretching and tying his books into a square cloth to carry
to school, and Wang Lung said to him :

"Was your elder brother not in the bed with you last
night?.'

And the boy answered unwillingly :
c No.'

There was some fear in his look and Wang Lung, seeing
it, cried out at him roughly :

'Where was he gone?' and when the boy would not
answer, he took him by the neck and shook him and cried,
'Now tell me all, you small dog!'

The boy was frightened at this, and he broke out sob-
bing and crying and said between his sobs:

'And Elder Brother said I was not to tell you and he
said he would pinch me and burn me with a hot needle if
I told and if I do not tell he gives me pence.'

183



And Wang Lung, beside himself at this, shouted out:

'Tell what, you who ought to die?'

And the boy looked about him and said desperately,
seeing that his father would choke him if he did not an-
swer:

'He has been away three nights altogether, but what he
does I do not know, except that he goes with the son of
your uncle, our cousin.'

Wang Lung loosed his hand then from the boy's neck
and he flung him aside and he strode forth into his uncle's
rooms, and there he found his uncle's son, hot and red of
face with wine, even as his own son, but steadier of foot,
for the young man was older and accustomed to the ways
of men. Wang Lung shouted at him :

'Where have you led my son?'

And the young man sneered at Wang Lung and he said :
'Ah, that son of my cousin's needs no leading. He can
go alone.'

But Wang Lung repeated it and this time he thought
to himself that he would kill this son of his uncle's now,
this impudent scampish face, and he cried in a terrible
voice :

'Where has my son been this night?'

Then the young man was frightened at the sound of
his voice and he answered sullenly and unwillingly, drop-
ping his impudent eyes:

' 'He was at the house of the whore who lives in the court
that once belonged to the great house/

When Wang Lung heard this he gave a great groan,
for the whore was one well known of many men and none
went to her except poor and common men, for she was no
longer young and she was willing to give much for little.
Without stopping for food he went out of his gate and
across his fields, and for once he saw nothing of what grew
on his land, and noted nothing of how the crop promised,
because of the trouble his son had brought to him. He
went with his eyes fixed inward, and he went through the
gate of the wall about the town, and he went to the house
that had been great.

The heavy gates were swung back widely now, and none

184



ever closed them upon their thick iron hinges, for any who
would might come and go in these days. And he went in,
and the courts and the rooms were filled with common
people, who rented the rooms, a family of common people
to a room. The place was filthy and the old pines hewed
down and those left standing were dying, and the pools in
the courts were choked with refuse.

But he saw none of this. He stood in the court of the
first house and he called out:

'Where is the woman called Yang, who is a whore?'

There was a woman there who sat on a three-legged
stool, sewing at a shoe sole, and she lifted her head and
nodded toward a side door opening on the court and she
took up her sewing again, as though many times she had
been asked this question by men.

Wang Lung went to the door and he beat on it, and a
fretful voice answered:

'Now go away, for I am done my business for this night
and I must sleep, since I work all night.'

But he beat again, and the voice cried out, 'W T ho is it?'

He would not answer, but he beat yet again, for he
would go in whether or not, and at last he heard a shuf-
fling and a woman opened the door, a woman none too
young and with a weary face and hanging, thick lips, and
coarse white paint on her forehead and red paint she had not
washed from her mouth and cheeks, and she looked at him
and said sharply:

'Now I cannot before to-night and if you like you may
come as early as you will then in the night, but now I
must sleep.'

But Wang Lung broke roughly into her talking, for the
sight of her sickened him and the thought of his son here
he could not bear, and he said:

'It is not for myself — I do not need such as you. It is
for my son.'

And he felt suddenly in his throat a thickening of weep-
ing for his son. Then the woman asked:
'Well, and what of your son?'
And Wang Lung answered and his voice trembled :
'He was here last night.'

185



'There were many sons of men here last night,' replied
the woman, 'and I do not know which was yours.'

Then Wang Lung said, beseeching her:
/Think and remember a little slight young lad, tall for
his years, but not yet a man, and I did not dream he dared
to try a woman.'

And she, remembering, answered:

'Were there two, and was one a young fellow with his
nose turned to the sky at the end and a look in his eye of
knowing everything, and his hat over one ear? And the
other, as you say, a tall big lad, but eager to be a man?'

And Wang Lung said, 'Yes — yes — that is he — that is
my son!'

'And what of your son?' said the woman.
Then Wang Lung said earnestly:

'This: if he ever comes again, put him off — say you
desire men only — say what you will— but every time you put
him off I will give you twice the fee of silver on your palm !'

The woman laughed then and carelessly and she said
in sudden good humour:

'And who would not say aye to this, to be paid for
not working? And so I say aye also. It is true enough
that I desire men, and little boys are small pleasure.' And
she nodded at Wang Lung as she spoke and leered at him
and he was sickened at her coarse face and he said hastily :

'So be it, then.'

He turned quickly and he walked home, and as he walked
he spat and spat again to rid him of his sickness at the me-
mory of the woman.

On this day, therefore, he said to Cuckoo:

'Let it be as you said. Go to the grain merchant and
arrange the matter. Let the dowry be good but not too
great if the girl is suitable and if it can be arranged.'

When he had said this to Cuckoo he went back to the
room and he sat beside his sleeping son and he brooded,
for he saw how fair and young the boy lay there, and he
saw the quiet face, asleep and smooth with its youth. Then
when he thought of the weary painted woman and her thick
lips, his heart swelled with sickness and anger and he sat
there muttering to himself.

186



And as he sat O-lan came in and stood looking at the
boy, and she saw the clear sweat standing on his skin and
she brought vinegar in warm water and washed the sweat
away gently, as they used to wash the young lords in the
great house when they drank too heavily. Then seeing the i
delicate childish face and the drunken sleep that even the fj
washing would not awaken, Wang Lung rose and went in P
his anger to his uncle's room, and he forgot the brother of
his father and he remembered only that this man was father/
to the idle, impudent young man who had spoiled his ownf
fair son, and he went in and he shouted :

'Now I have harboured an ungrateful nest of snakes
and they have bitten me!'

His uncle was sitting leaning over a table eating his
breakfast, for he never rose until midday, seeing there was
no work* he had to do, and he looked up at these words
and he said lazily :

'How now?'

Then Wang Lung told him, half-choking, what had
happened, and his uncle only laughed and he said:

'Well, and can you keep a boy from becoming a man?
And can you keep a young dog from a stray bitch?'

When Wang Lung heard this laughter he remembered
in one crowded space of time all that he had endured
because of his uncle; how of old his uncle had tried to
force him to the selling of his land, and how they lived
here, these three, eating and drinking and idle, and how
his wife's uncle ate of the expensive foods Cuckoo bought
for Lotus, and now how his uncle's son had spoiled his own
fair lad, and he bit his tongue between his teeth and he said :

'Now out of my house, you and yours, and no more
rice will there be for any of you from this hour, and I will
burn the house down rather than have it shelter you, who
have no gratitude even in your idleness!'

But his uncle sat where he was and ate on, now from
this bowl and now from that, and Wang Lung stood there
bursting with his blood, and when he saw his uncle paid,
no heed to him, he stepped forward with his arm upraised.
Then the uncle turned and said:

'Drive me out if you dare.'



187



And when Wang Lung stammered and blustered, not

understanding. 'Well — and what — well and what ' his

uncle opened his coat and showed him what was against
its lining.

Then Wang Lung stood still and rigid, for he saw there
a false beard of red hair and a length of red cloth, and
Wang Lung stared at these things, and the anger went
out of him like water and he shook because there was no
strength left in him.

Now these things, the red beard and the red length of
cloth were sign and symbol of a band of robbers who lived
and marauded toward the north-west, and many houses had
they burned and women they had carried away, and good
farmers they had bound with ropes to the threshold of their
own houses and men found them there next day, raving
mad if they lived and burnt and crisp as roasted meat if
they were dead. And Wang Lung stared and his eyes hung
out of his head, and he turned and went away without a
word. And as he went he heard his uncle's whispered laugh-
ter as he stooped again over his rice bowl.

Now Wang Lung found himself in such a coil as he
had never dreamed of. His uncle came and went as before,
grinning a little under the sparse and scattered hairs of his
grey beard, his robes wrapped and girdled about his body
as carellessly as ever, and Wang Lung sweated chilly when
he saw him but he dared not speak anything except courteous
words for fear of what his uncle might do to him. It was
true that during all these years of his prosperity and
especially during the years when there were no harvests or
only very little and other men had starved with their
children, never had bandits come to his house and his
lands, although he had many times been afraid and had
barred the doors stoutly at night. Until the summer of his
love he had dressed himself coarsely and had avoided the
appearance of wealth, and when among the villagers he
heard stories of marauding he came home and slept fitfully
and listened for sounds out of the night.

But the robbers never came to his house and he grew
careless and bold and he believed he was protected by

188



heaven and that he was a man of good fortune by destiny,
and he grew heedless of everything, even of incense of the
gods, since they were good enough to him without, and he
thought of nothing except of his own affairs and of his f
land. And now suddenly he saw why he had been safe
and why he would be safe so long as he fed the three of |
his uncle's house. When he thought of this he sweated
heavy cold sweat, and he dared to tell no one what his
uncle hid in his bosom.

But to his uncle he said no more of leaving the house,
and to his uncle's wife he said with what urging he could
muster :

'Eat what you like in the inner courts and here is a bit
of silver to spend.'

And to his uncle's son he said, although the gorge rose
in his throat, yet he said :

'Here is a bit of silver, for young men will play.'

But his own son Wang Lung watched and he would
not allow him to leave the courts after sundown, although
the lad grew angry and flung himself about and slapped
the younger children for nothing except his own ill-humour.
So was Wang Lung encompassed about with his troubles.

At first Wang Lung could not work for thinking of all
the trouble that had befallen him, and he thought of this
trouble and that, and he thought. 'I could turn my uncle
out and I could move inside the city wall where they lock
the great gates every night against robbers,' but then he
remembered that every day he must come to work on his
fields, and who could tell what might happen to him as he
worked defenceless, even on his own Jand? Moreover, how
could a man live locked in a town and in a house in the
town, and he would die if he were cut off from his land.
There would surely come a bad year, moreover, and even
the town could not withstand robbers, as it had not in the
past when the great house fell.

And he could go into the town and go to the court
where the magistrate lived and say to him :

'My uncle is one of the Redbeards.'

But if he did this, who would believe him , who would
believe a man when he told such a thing of his own father's



189



brother? It was more likely that he would be beaten for
his unfilial conduct rather than his uncle suffer, and in the
end he would go in fear of his life, for if the robbers heard
of it, they wculd kill him for revenge

Then, as if this were not enough, Cuckoo came back
from the grain merchant with news that although the affair
of the betrothal had gone well, the merchant Liu was not
willing that anything should take place now except the
exchange of the betrothal papers, for the maid was too
young for marriage, being but fourteen years old, and must
w T ait for another three years. Wang Lung was dismayed
at three more years of this lad's anger and idleness and
mooning eyes, for he would not go to school now two days
out of ten, and Wang Lung shouted at O-lan that night
when he ate :

'Well, and let us betroth these other children as soon
as we are able, and the sooner the better, and let us marry
them as soon as they begin to yearn, for I cannot have this
over again three more times!'

And the next morning, having slept but little through
the night, he tore off his long robes and kicked off his
shoes and, as was his wont when the affairs of his house
became too deep for him, he took a hoe and he went out
to his fields and he went through the outer court where the
eldest girl sat smiling and twisting her bit of cloth through
her fingers and smoothing it, and he muttered:

'Well, and that poor fool of mine brings me more comfort
than all the others put together.'

And he went out to his land day after day for many
days.

[Then the good land did again its healing work and the
sun shone on him and healed him and the warm winds of
summer wrapped him about with peace. (And as if to cure
him of the root of his ceaseless thought of his own troubles,
there came out of the south one day a small, slight cloud.
At first it hung on the horizon small and smooth as a mist,
except it did not come hither and thither as clouds blown
by the wind do, but it stood steady until it spread fanwise
up into the air.

The men of the village watched it and talked of it and



190



fear hung over them, for what they feared was this, that
locusts had come out of the south to devour what was
planted in the fields. Wang Lung stood there also, watching;
and they gazed and at last a wind blew something to their
feet, and one stooped hastily and picked it up and it was
a dead locust, dead and lighter than the living hosts behind.

Then Wang Lung forgot everything that troubled him.
Women and sons and uncle, he forgot them all, and he
rushed among the frightened villagers, and he shouted at
them:

'Now for our good land we will fight these enemies
from the skies!'

But there were some who shook their heads, hopeless
from the start, and these said :

'No, and there is no use in anything. Heaven has ordain-
ed that this year we shall starve, and why should we waste
ourselves in struggle against it, seeing that in the end we
must starve?'

And women went weeping to the town to buy incense
to thrust before the earth gods in the little temple, and
some went to the big temple in the town, where the gods
of heaven were, and thus earth and heaven were worshipped.

But still the locusts spread up into the air and on over
the land.

Then Wang Lung called his own labourers and Ching
stood silent and ready beside him, and there were others
of the younger farmers, and with their own hands these
set fire to certain fields and they burned the good wheat
that stood almost ripe for cutting and they dug wide moats
and ran water into them from the wells, and they worked
without sleeping. O-lan brought them food and the women
brought their men food, and the men ate standing and in
the field, gulping it down as beasts do, as they worked night
and day.

Then the sky grew black and the air was filled with
the deep still roar of many wings beating against each
other, and upon the land the locusts fell, flying over this
field and leaving it whole, and falling upon that field, and
eating it as bare as winter. And men sighed and said 'So
Heaven wills,' but Wang Lung was furious and he beat the

191



locusts and trampled on them and his men flailed them
with flails and the locusts fell into the fires that were kindled
and they floated dead upon the waters of the moats that
were dug. And many millions of them died, but to those
that were left it was nothing.

Nevertheless, for all his fighting Wang Lung had this
as his reward: the best of his fields were spared; and when
the cloud moved on and they could rest themselves, there
was still wheat that he could reap and his young rice beds
were spared and he was content. Then many of the people
ate the roasted bodies of the locusts, but Wang Lung him-
self would not eat them, for to him they were a filthy thing
because of what they had done to his land. But he said
nothing when O-lan fried them in oil and when the labourers
crunched them between their teeth and the children pulled
them apart delicately and tasted them, afraid of their great
eyes. But as for himself he would not eat.

Nevertheless, the locusts did this for him. For seven
days he thought of nothing but his land, and he was healed
j of his troubles and his fears, and he said to himself calmly :

'Well, and every man has his troubles and I must make
shift to live with mine as I can, and my uncle is older than
I and he will die, and three years must pass as they can with
my son and I shall not kill myself.'

And he reaped his wheat and the rains came and the
young green rice was set into the flooded fields and again
it was summer.

XXIV

ONE DAY AFTER WANG LUNG HAD SAID TO HIMSELF
that peace was in his house, his eldest son came to him
as he returned at noon from the land, and the lad said:

'Father, if I am to be a scholar, there is no more that
this old head in the town can teach me.'

Wang Lung had dipped from the cauldron in the kitchen
a basin of boiling water and into this he dipped a towel
and wrung it and holding it steaming against his face he
said:

'Well, and how now?'



192



The lad hesitated and then he went on:

'Well, and if I am to be a scholar, I would like to go
to the south to the city and enter a great school where I
can learn what is to be learned/

Wang Lung rubbed the towel about his eyes and his
ears and with his face all steaming he answered his son
sharply, for his body ached with his labour in the fields:

'Well, and what nonsense is this? I say you cannot
go and I will not be teased about it, for I say you cannot
go. You have learning enough for these parts.'

And he dipped the cloth in again and wrung it.

But the young man stood there and stared at his father
with hatred and he muttered something and Wang Lung
was angry for he could not hear what it was, and he bawled
at his son:

'Speak out what you have to say!'

Then the young man flared at the noise of his father's
voice and he said:

'Well, and I will, then, for go south I will, and I will
not stay in this stupid house and be watched like a child,
and in this little town which is no better than a village ! I
will go out and learn something and see other parts.'

Wang Lung looked at his son and he looked at him-
self, and his son stood there in a pale, long robe of silver
grey linen, thin and cool for the summer's heat, and on
his lips were the first black hairs of his manhood, and his
skin was smooth and golden and his hands under his long
sleeves were soft and fine as a woman's. Then Wang Lung
looked at himself and he was thick and stained with earth
and he wore only trousers of blue cotton cloth girt about
his knees, and his waist and his upper body were naked,
and one would have said he was his son's servant rather
than his father. And this thought made him scornful of
the young man's tall, fine looks, and he was brutal and
angry and he shouted out :

TSTow then, get you into the fields and rub a little good
earth on yourself lest men take you for a woman, and work
a little for the rice you eat!'

And Wang Lung forgot that he had ever had pride in
his son's writing and in his cleverness at books, and he

5056, 13.



flung himself out, stamping his bare feet as he walked and
spitting upon the floor coarsely, because the fineness of his
son angered him for the moment. And the lad stood and
looked at him with hatred, but Wang Lung would not turn
back to see what the lad did.

Nevertheless, that night when Wang Lung went into
the inner courts and sat beside Lotus as she lay upon the
mat on her bed, where Cuckoo fanned her as she lay,
Lotus said to him idly as of a thing of no account, but only
•something to say:

'That big lad of yours is pining and desires to go away.'

Then Wang Lung, remembering his anger against his
son, said sharply:

'Well, and what is it to you? I will not have him in these
rooms at his age.'

But Lotus made haste to reply, 'No — no — it is Cuckoo
who says it.' And Cuckoo made haste to say. 'Any one
can see the thing and a lovely lad he is and too big for
idleness and longing.'

Wang Lung was led aside by this and he thought only
of his anger against his son and he said :

'No, and he shall not go. I will not spend my money
foolishly.' And he would not speak of it any more and
Lotus saw he was peevish from some anger, and she sent
Cuckoo away and suffered him there alone.

Then for many days there was nothing said and the
lad seemed suddenly content again, but he would not go
to school any more and this Wang Lung allowed him, for
the boy was nearly eighteen and large like his mother in
frame of bones, and he read in his own room when his
father came into the house and Wang Lung was content
and he thought to himself:

'It was a whim of his youth and he does not know what
he wants, and there are only three years — it may be a
little extra silver will make it two, or even one, if the silver
is enough. One of these days when the harvests are well
over and the winter wheat planted and the beans hoed, I
will see to it.'

Then Wang Lung forgot his son, for the harvests, ex-
cept what the locusts had consumed, were fair enough and

194



by now he had gained once more -what he had spent on
the woman Lotus. His gold and his silver were precious to
him once more, and at times he marvelled secretly to him-
self that he had ever spent so freely upon a woman.

Still, there were times when she stirred him sweetly, if
not so strongly as at first, and he was proud to own her,
although he saw well enough that what his uncle's wife had
said was true, that she was none too young for all her
smallness of stature, and she never conceived to bear a
child for him. But for this he cared nothing, since he had
sons and daughters, and he was willing enough to keep her
for the pleasure she gave him.

As for Lotus, she grew lovelier as her fullness of years
came on, for if before she had had a fault, it was her bird-
like thinness that made too sharp the lines of her little
pointed face and hollowed too much her temples. But
now, under the food which Cuckoo cooked for her, and
under the idleness of her life with one man only, she be-
came soft and rounded in body, and her face grew full
and smooth at the temples, and with her wide eyes and
small mouth she looked more than ever like a plump little
cat. And she slept and ate and took on her body this soft,
smooth flesh. If she was no longer the lotus bud, neither
was she more than the full-blown, flower and if she was
not young, neither did she look old, and youth and age
were equally far from her.

With his life placid again and the lad content., Wang
Lung might have been satisfied except that one night when
he sat late and alone, reckoning on his fingers what he
could sell of his corn and what he could sell of his rice^j
O-lan came softly into the room. This one, with the passing
of the years had grown lean and gaunt and the rock-like
pones of her face stood forth and her eyes were sunken, j
If one asked her how she did she said no more than this: I

'There is a fire in my vitals.'

Her belly was as great as though with child these three
years, only there was no birth. But she rose at dawn and /



she did her work and Wang Lung saw only as he saw



the table or his chair or* a tree in the court, never even so
keenly as he might see one of the oxen drooping its head




*95



or a pig that would not eat. And she did her work alone
and spoke no more than she could escape speaking with
the wife of Wang Lung's uncle, and she never spoke at all
to Cuckoo. Never once had O-lan gone into the inner
courts, and rarely, if Lotus came out to walk a little in a
place other than her own court, O-lan went into her room
and sat until one said, 4 She is gone.' And she said nothing
but she worked at her cooking and at the washing at the
pool even in the winter when the water was stiff with ice
to be broken. But Wang Lung never thought to say:

'Well, and why do you not with the silver I have to
spare, hire a servant or buy a slave?'

It did not occur to him that there was any need of this,
although he hired labourers for his fields and to help with
the oxen and asses and with the pigs he had, and in the
summers when the river flooded, he hired men for the
time to herd the ducks and geese he fed upon the waters.

On this evening, then, when he sat alone with only the
red candles in the pewter stands alight, she stood before
him and looked this way and that, and at last she said:

'I have something to say.'

Then he stared at her in surprise and he answered :
'Well, and say on.'

And he stared at her and at the shadowed hollows of
her face and he thought again how there was no beauty in
her and how for many years had he not desired her.

Then she said in a harsh whisper :

'The eldest son goes too often into the inner courts.
When you are away he goes.'

Now Wang Lung could not at first grasp what she said
thus whispering and he leaned forward with his mouth
agape and he said :

'What, woman?'

She pointed mutely to her son's room and pursed her
thick dry lips at the door of the inner court. But Wang
Lung stared at her, robust and unbelieving.

'You dream!' he said finally.

She shook her head at this, and, the difficult speech
halting on her lips, she said further :

'Well, and my lord, come home unexpectedly.' And

196



again, after a silence. £ It is better to send him away, even
to the south.' And then she went to the table and took
his bowl of tea and felt of it and spilled the cool tea on
the brick floor and filled the bowl again from the hot pot,
and as she came she went, silent, and left him sitting there
agape.

Well, and this woman, she was jealous he said to him-
self. Well and he would not trouble about this, with his
lad content and reading every day in his own room, and
he rose and laughed and put it away from him, laughing
at the small thoughts of women.

But when he went in that night to lie beside Lotus and
when he turned upon the bed she complained and was
petulant and she pushed him away saying:

'It is hot and you stink and I wish you would wash
yourself before you come to lie beside me.'

She sat up, then, and pushed her hair fretfully back
from her face and she shrugged her shoulders when he
would have drawn her to him, and she would not yield to
his coaxing. Then he lay still and he remembered that she
had yielded unwillingly these many nights, and he had
thought it her whim and the heavy hot air of departing
summer that depressed her, but now the words of O-lan
stood out sharply and he rose up roughly and said :

'Well, and sleep alone then, and cut my throat if I care!'

He flung himself out of the room and strode into the
middle room of his own house and he put two chairs to-
gether and stretched himself on them. But he could not
sleep and he rose and v/ent out of his gate and he walked
among the bamboos beside the house wall, and there he
felt the cool night wind upon his hot flesh, and there was
the coolness of coming autumn in it.

Then he remembered this, that Lotus had known of
his son's desire to go away, and how had she known?
And he remembered that of late his son had said nothing
of going away but had been content, and why was he con-
tent? And Wang Lung said to his heart, fiercely:

'I will see the thing for myself!'

And he watched the dawn come ruddy out of a mist
over his land.



197



When the dawn was come and the sun showed a gold
rim Over the edge of the fields, he went in and he ate, and
then he went out to oversee his men as his custom was in
times of harvest and planting, and he went here and there
over his land, and at last he shouted loudly, so that any
one in his house might hear ;

'Now I am going to the piece by the moat of the town
and I shall not be back early,' and he set his face to the town.

But when he had gone half-way and reached as far as
the small temple he sat down beside the road on a hillock
of grass that was an old grave, now forgotten, and he
plucked a grass and twisted it in his fingers and he medi-
tated. Facing him were the small gods and on the surface
of his mind he noted how they stared at him and how of
old he had been afraid of them, but now he was careless,
having become prosperous and in no need of gods, so that
he scarcely saw them. Underneath he thought to himself,
over and over:

'Shall l'go back?'

Then suddenly he remembered the night before when
Lotus had pushed him away, and he was angry because
of all he had done for her and he said to himself :

'Well I know that she would not have lasted many
years more at the tea-house, and in my house she is fed
and clothed richly.'

And in the strength of his anger he rose and he strode
back to his house by another way and he went secretly
into his house and stood at the curtain that hung in the
door to the inner court. And listening, he heard the mur-
muring of a man's voice, and it was the voice of his own
son.

Now the anger that arose in Wang Lung's heart was
an anger he had not known in all his life before, although
as things had prospered with him and as men came to call
him rich, he had lost his early timidity of a country fellow,
and had grown full of small, sudden angers, and he was
proud even in the town. But this anger now was the anger
of one man against another man who steals away the loved
woman, and when Wang Lung remembered that the other
man was his own son, he was filled with a vomiting sickness.

198



He set his teeth then, and he went out and chose a slim,
supple, bamboo from the grove and he ripped off the
branches, except for a cluster of small branches at the top,
thin and hard as cord, and he ripped off the leaves. Then
he went in softly, and suddenly he tore aside the curtain
and there was his son, standing in the court, and looking
down at Lotus, who sat on a small stool at the edge of the
pool. And Lotus was dressed in her peach-coloured silk
coat, such as he had never seen her dressed in by the light
of the morning.

These two talked together, and the woman laughed
lightly and looked at the young man from the corner of
her eyes, her head turned aside, and they did not hear
Wang Lung. He stood and stared at them, his face whitening
and his lips lifted back and snarling from his teeth, and
his hands tightened about the bamboo. And still the two
did not hear him and would not, except that the woman
Cuckoo came out and saw him and shrieked and they saw.

Then Wang Lung leaped forward and he fell on his son,
lashing him, and although the lad was taller than he, he
was stronger from his labour in the fields and from the
robustness of his mature body, and he beat the lad until
the blood streamed down. When Lotus screamed and drag-
ged at his arm he shook her off, and when she persisted,
screaming, he beat her also and he beat her until she fled
and he beat the young man until he stopped cowering to
the ground, and covered his torn face in his hands.

Then Wang Lung paused and his breath whistled through
his parted lips and the sweat poured down his body until
he was drenched and he was weak as though with an
illness. He threw down his bamboo and he whispered to
the boy, panting:

'Now get you to your room and do not dare to come
out of it until I am rid of you, lest I kill you!'

And the boy rose without a word and went out.

Wang Lung sat on the stool where Lotus had sat and
he put his head in his hands and closed his eyes and his
breath came and went in great gasps. No one drew near
him and he sat thus alone until he was quieted and his
anger gone.

x 99



/



Then he rose wearily and he went into the room and
Lotus lay there on her bed, weeping aloud, and he went
up to her and he turned her over, and she lay looking at
him and weeping and there on her face lay the swollen
purple mark of his whip.

And he said to her with great sadness:

'So you must ever be a whore and go a-whoring after
my own sons!'

And she cried more loudly at this and protested:

'No, but I did not, and the lad was lonely and came
in and you may ask Cuckoo if he ever came nearer to my
bed than you saw him in the court!'

Then she looked at him frightened and piteous and she
reached for his hand and drew it across the welt on her
face and she whimpered :

'See what you have done to your Lotus — and there
is no man in the world except you, and if it is your son,
it is only your son, and what is he to me!'

She looked up at him, her pretty eyes swimming in
her clear tears, and he groaned because this woman's
beauty was more than he could wish and he loved her
when he would not. And it seemed to him suddenly that
he could not bear to know what had passed between these
two and he wished never to know and it was better for
him if he did not. So he groaned again and he went out.
He passed his son's room and he called without entering :

'Well, and how put your things in the box and to-morrqw
go south to what you will and do not come home until
I send for you.'

Then he went on and there was O-lan sitting sewing
on some garment of his, and when he passed she said
nothing, and if she had heard the beating and the scream-
ing, she made no sign of it. And he went on and out to
his fields and into the high sun of noon, and he was spent
as with the labour of a whole day.



200



XXV



WHEN THE ELDEST SON WAS GONE WANG LUNG FELT
the house was purged of some surcharge of unrest and
it was a relief to him. He said to himself that it was a good
thing for the young man to be gone, and now he could
look to his other chidren and see what they were, for what
with his own troubles and the land which must be planted
and harvested in season whatever might happen elsewhere,
he hardly knew what he had for children after this eldest
son. He decided, moreover, that he would early take the
second lad out of school and he would apprentice him to
a trade and not wait for the wildness of young manhood
to catch him and make him a plague in the house as the
older one had been.

Now the second son of Wang Lung was as unlike the
elder as two sons in a house may be. Where the elder
was tall and big-boned and ruddy-faced as men of the
north and like his mother, this second one was short and
slight and yellow-skinned, and there was that in him which
reminded Wang Lung of his own father, a crafty, sharp,
humorous eye, and a turn for malice if the moment came
for it. And Wang Lung said:

'Well, and this boy will make a good merchant and I
will take him out of school and see if he can be apprenticed
in the grain market. It will be a convenient thing to have
a son there where I sell my harvests and he cl;i watch the
scales and tip the weight a little in my favour.'

Therefore he said to Cuckoo one day:

'Now go and tell the father of my eldest son's betrothed
that I have something to say to him. And we should at
any rate drink a cup of wine together, seeing that we are
to be poured into one bowl, his blood and mine.'

Cuckoo went, then, and came back saying:

'He will see you when you wish and if you can come
to drink wine this noon it is well, and if you wish it he
will come here instead.'

But Wang Lung did not wish the town merchant to
come to his house because he feared he would have to



201



prepare this and that, and so he washed himself and put
on his silk coat and he set out across the fields. He went
first to the Street of Bridges, as Cuckoo had told him, and
there before a gate which bore the name of Liu he stopped.
Not that he knew the word himself, but he guessed the
gate, two doors to the right of the bridge, and he asked
one who passed and the letter was the letter of Liu. It
was a respectable gate built plainly of wood, and Wang
Lung struck it with the palm of his hand.

Immediately it opened and a woman servant stood there,
wiping her wet hands on her apron as she spoke to
ask who he was, and when he answered his name, she
stared at him, and led him into the first court where the
men lived and she took him into a room and bade him
seat himself, and she stared at him again, knowing he was
the father of the betrothed of the daughter of the house.
Then she went out to call her master.

Wang Lung looked about him carefully, and he rose
and felt of the stuffs of the curtains in the doorway, and
examined the wood of the plain table, and' he was pleased,
for there was evidence of good living but not of extreme
wealth. He did not want a rich daughter-in-law lest she be
haughty and disobedient and cry for this and that of food
and clothes and turn aside his son's heart from his parents.
Then Wang sat down again and waited.

Suddenly there was a heavy step and a stout elderly
man entered and Wang Lung rose and bowed and they
both bowed, looking secretly at each other, and they liked
each other, each respecting the other for what he was, a
man of worth and prosperity. Then they seated themselves
and they drank of the hot wine which the servant woman
poured out for them, and they talked slowly of this and
that, of crops and prices and what the price would be for
rice this year, if the harvest were good. And at last Wang
Lung said:

'Well, and I have come for a thing and if it is not your
wish, let us talk of other things. But if you have need
for a servant in your great market, there is my second son,
and & sharp one he is, but if you have no need of him, let
us talk of other things.'

202



Then the merchant said with great good humour:

'And so I have such need of a sharp young man, if he
reads and writes.'

And Wang Lung answered proudly:

'My sons are both good scholars and they can each
tell when a letter is wrongly written, and whether the wood
or the water radical is right.'

'That is well,' said Liu. 'And let him come when he
will and his wages at first are only his food until he learns
the business, and then after a year if he do well, he may
have a piece of silver at the end of every moon, and at the
end of three years three pieces, and after that he is no
longer apprentice, but he may rise as he is able in the
business. And besides this wage, there is whatever fee he
may extract from this buyer and that seller, and this I say
nothing about if he is able to get it. And because our
two families are united, there is no fee of guaranty I will
ask of you for his coming.'

Wang Lung rose then, well-pleased, and he laughed
and said:

'Now we are friends, and have you no son for my
second daughter?'

Then the merchant laughed richly, for he was fat and
well-fed, and he said:

'I have a second son of ten whom I have not betrothed
yet. How old is the girl?'

Wang Lung laughed again and answered:

'She is ten on her next birthday and she is a pretty
flower.'

Then the two men laughed together and the merchant
said:

'Shall we tie ourselves together with a double rope?'

Then Wang Lung said no more, for it was not a thing
that could be discussed face to face beyond this. But after
he had bowed and gone away well pleased, he said to
himself, 'The thing may be done,' and he looked at his
young daughter when he came home and she was a pretty
child and her mother had bound her feet well, so that she
moved about with small graceful steps.

But when Wang Lung looked at her thus closely he

203



(J



saw the marks of tears on her cheeks, and her face was a
shade too pale and grave for her years, and he drew her
to him by her little hand and he said :
'Now why have you wept?'

Then she hung her head and toyed with a button on
her coat and said, shy and half-murmuring:

'Because my mother binds a cloth about my feet more
tightly every day and I cannot sleep at night.'

'Now I have not heard you weep,' he said, wondering.

i'No,' she said simply, 'and my mother said I was not
to weep aloud because you are too kind and weak for
pain and you might say to leave me as I am, and then my
husband would not love me even as you do not love her.'

This she said as simply as a child recites a tale x _and
Wang Lung was stabbed at hearing this, that O-lan had
told the child he did not love her who was the child's
' mother, and he said quickly:

j 'Well, and to-day I have heard of a pretty husband for
1 you, and we will see if Cuckoo can arrange the matter.'
r Then the child smiled and dropped her head, suddenly
a maid and no more a child. And Wang Lung said to
Cuckoo on that same evening when he was in the inner
court :

P" 'Go and see if it can be done.'

But he slept uneasily beside Lotus that night and he
j woke and fell to thinking of his life of how O-lan had
been the first woman he had known and how she had
been a faithful servant beside him. And he thought of
what the child said, and he was sad, because with all her
dimness O-lan had seen the truth in him.

In the near days after this he sent his second son away
into the town and he signed the papers for the second
girl's betrothal and the dowry was decided upon and the
gifts of clothing and jewellery for her marriage day were
fixed. Then Wang Lung rested and he said to his heart:

'Well, and now all my children are provided -for, and
my poor fool can do nothing but sit in the sun with her
bit of cloth and the youngest boy I will keep for the land
and he shall not go to school, since two can read and it
is enough.'



204



He was proud because he had three sons and one was
a scholar and one a merchant and one a farmer. He was
content, then, and he gave over thinking any more about
his children. But whether he would or not there came
into his mind the thought of the woman who had borne
them to him.

For the fir^t time in his years with her Wang Lung
began to think about O-lan. Even in the days of her new-
coming he had not thought of her for herself and not J
further than because she was a woman and the first he,
had known. And it seemed to him that with this thing!
and that he had been busy and without time to spare, and ;
only now, when his children were settled and his fields '
cared for arid quiet under the coming of winter, and now,
when his life with Lotus was regulated and she was sub-
missive to him since he had beat her, now it seemed to
him he had time to think of what he would and he thought
of O-lan.

He looked at her, not because she was woman this
time, and not that she was ugly and gaunt and yellow-
skinned. But he looked at her with some strange remorse,
and he saw that she had grown thin and her skin was
sere and yellow. She had always been a dark woman, her
skin tuddy and brown when she worked in the fields.
Yet now for many years she had not gone into the fields,
except perhaps at harvest time, and not then for two years
and more, for he disliked her to go, lest men say:

'And does your wife still work on the land and you
rich?'

Nevertheless, he had not thought why she had been
willing at last to stay in the house and why she moved
slowly and more slowly about, and he remembered, now
that he thought of it, that in the mornings sometimes he
heard her groaning when she rose from her bed and when
she stooped to feed the oven, and only when he asked,
'Well, and what is it?' did she cease suddenly. Now, looking
at her and at the strange swelling she had on her body,
he was stricken with remorse, although he did not know
why, and he argued with himself:

'Well, and it is not my fault if 1 have not loved her

205



as one loves a concubine, since men do not.' And to himself
he said for comfort. 'I have not beat her and I have given
her silver when she asked for it.'
~rr But still he could not forget what the child had said
and it pricked him, although he did not know why, seeing
that, when he came to argue the matter out, he had always
been a good husband to her and better than most.
Because he could not be rid of this unease toward her,
j then, he kept looking at her as she brought in his food or
\ as she moved about, and when she stooped to sweep the
brick floor one day after they had eaten, he saw her face
\ turn grey with some inner pain, and she opened her lips
and panted softly, and she put her hand to her belly,
although still stooping as though to sweep. He asked her
sharply :

'What is it?'

But she averted her face and answered meekly :

'It is only the old pain in my vitals.'

Then he stared at her and he said to the younger girl :

'Take the broom and sweep, for your mother is ill/
And to O-lan he said more kindly than he had spoken to
her in many years. 'Go in and lie on your bed, and I will
bid the girl bring you hot water. Do not get up.'

She obeyed him. slowly and without answer, and she -
went in to her room and he heard her dragging about it,
and at last she lay down and moaned softly. Then he sat
listening to this moaning until he could not bear it, and
he rose and went in to the town to ask where a doctor's
shop was.

He found a shop recommended to him by a clerk in
the grain market where his second son now was, and he
went to it. There the doctor sat idle over a pot of tea. He
was an old man with a long grey beard and brass spectacles
large as an owl's eyes his nose, and he wore a dirty grey
robe whose long sleeves covered his hands altogether.
When Wang Lung told him what his .wife's symptoms
were, he pursed his lips and opened a drawer of the table
at which he sat, and he took out a bundle, wrapped in a
black cloth and he said:

M will come now.'



206



When they came to O-lan's bed she had fallen into a
light sleep and the sweat stood like dew on her upper
lip and on her forehead, and the old doctor shook his
head to see it. He put forth a hand as dried and yellowed
as an ape's hand and he felt for her pulse, and then after
he had held it for a long time, he shook his head again
gravely, saying:

'The spleen is enlarged and the liver diseased. There
is a rock as large as a man's head in the womb; the stomach
is disintegrated. The heart barely moves and doubtless
there are worms in it.'

At these words Wang Lung's own heart stopped and
he was afraid and he shouted out angrily:

'Well, and give her medicine, can you not?'

O-lan opened her eyes as he spoke and looked at them,
not understanding and drowsy with pain. Then the old
doctor spoke again:

c It is a difficult case. If yoti do not wish guarantee of
recovery, I will ask for fee ten pieces of silver and I will
give you a prescription of herbs and a tiger's heart dried
in it and the tooth of a dog, and these boil together and
let her drink the broth. But if you wish complete recovery
guarantee, then five hundred pieces of silver.'
"Tsfow when O-lan heard the words, "five hundred pieces
of silver" she came suddenly out of her languor and she
said weakly:

'No, and my life is not worth so much. A good piece
of land can be bought for so much.'

Then when Wang Lung heard her say this all his old
remorse smote him and he answered her fiercely:

'I will have no death in my house and I can pay the
silver.'

Now when the old doctor heard him say, "I can pay
the silver," his eyes shone greedily enough, but he knew
the penalty of the law if he did not keep his word and the
woman died, and so he said, although with regret:

'Nay, and as I look at the colour of the whites of her
eyes, I see I was mistaken. Five thousand of silver must I
have if I guarantee full recovery.'

Then Wang Lung looked at the doctor in silence and



207



in sad understanding. He had not so many pieces of silver
in the world unless he sold his land, but he knew that
even though he sold his land it was no avail, for it was
simply that the doctor said, "The woman will die."

He went out with the doctor, therefore, and he paid
him the ten pieces of silver, and when he was gone Wang
Lung went into the dark kitchen where O-lan had lived
her life for the most part, and where, now that she was not
there, none would see him, and he turned his face to the
blackened wall, and he wept.



XXVI

BIUT THERE WAS NO SUDDEN DYING OF LIFE IN
O-lan's body. She was scarcely past the middle of her span
of years, and her life would not easily pass from her body,
so that she lay dying on her bed for many months. All
through the long months of winter she lay dying and upon
her bed, and for the first time Wang Lung and his children
I knew what she had been in the* house, and how she made
I comfort for them all and they had not known it.

It seemed now that none knew how to light the grass
and keep it burning in the oven, and none knew how to
turn a fish in the cauldron without breaking it or burning
one side black before the other side was cooked, and. none
knew whether sesame oil or bean were right for frying this
vegetable or that. The filth of the crumbs and dropped
food lay under the table and none swept it unless Wang
Lung grew impatient with the smell of it and called in M
dog from the court to lick it up or shouted at the younger
girl to scrape it up and throw it out.

And the youngest lad did this and that to fill his mother's
place with the old man his grandfather, who was helpless
as a little child now, and Wang Lung could not make the
old man understand what had happened that O-lan no
longer came to- bring him tea and hot water and to help
him lie down and stand up, and he was peevish because
he called her and she did not come, and he threw his bowl
of tea on the ground like a wilful child. At last Wang Lung

208



led him in to O-lan's room and showed him the bed where
she lay, and the old man stared out of his filmed and half-
blind eyes, and he mumbled and wept because he saw
dimly that something was wrong.

Only the poor fool knew nothing, and only she smiled
and twisted her bit of cloth as she smiled. Yet one had
to think of her to bring her in to sleep at night and to feed
her and to set her in the sun in the day and to lead her
in if it rained. All this one of them had to remember. But
even Wang Lung himself forgot, and once they left her
outside through a whole night, and the next morning the
poor wretch was shivering and crying in the early dawn,
and Wang Lung was angry and cursed his son and daughter
that they had forgotten the poor fool who was their sister.
Then he saw that they were but children trying to take
their mother's place and not able to do it, and he forebore.
And after that he saw to the poor fool himself night and
morning; if it rained or snowed or a bitter wind blew,
he led her in and he let her sit among the warm ashes that
dropped from the kitchen stove.

All during the dark winter months when O-lan lay
dying Wang Lung paid no heed to the land. He turned
over the winter's work and the men to the government of
Ching, and Ching laboured faithfully, and night and morn-
ing he came to the door of the room where O-lan lay and
he asked twice each day thus in his piping whisper how
she did. At last Wang Lung could not bear it because every
d^y and every night he could only say :

' 'To-day she drank a little soup from a fowl,' or 'To-day
she ate a little thin gruel of rice.'

So he commanded Ching to ask no more but to do
the work well and it would be enough.

All during the cold dark winter Wang Lung sat often
beside O-lan's bed, and if she* were cold he lit an earthen 1
pot of charcoal and set it beside her bed for warmth, and
she murmured each time faintly:

'Well, and it is too expensive.'
. At last one day when she said this he could not bear
it and he burst forth:



5056, 14.



209



'This I cannot bear! I would sell all my land if it could'
heal you/

She smiled at this and said in gasps, whispering:

'No, and I would not — let you. For I must die — some-
i time anyway. But the land is there after me.'*/

But he would not talk of her death and he rose and
went out when she spoke of it.

Nevertheless because he knew that she must die and
that he must remember his duty, he went one day into the
town to a coffin-maker's shop and he looked at every coffin \
that stood there ready to be bought, and he chose a good
black one made from heavy and hard wood. Then thej
carpenter, who waited for him to choose, said cunningly : \

% If you take two, the price is a third off for the two,
and why do you not buy one for yourself and know you ;
are provided?'

'No, and my sons can do it for me,' answered Wang.
Lung, and then he thought of his own father and he had
not yet a coffin for the old man and he was struck with
the thought and he said again, 'But there is my old father
and he will die one day soon, weak as he is on his two
legs and deaf and half blind, and so I will take the :
two.'

And the man promised to paint the coffins again a good ,
' black and send them to Wang Lung's house. So Wang
Lung told O-lan what he had done, and she was pleased
I that he had done it for her, and had provided well for
| her death.

Thus he sat by her many hours of the day, and they
did not talk much, for she was faint, and besides there had
never been talk between them. Often she forgot where she
was as he sat there in stillness and silence, and sometimes
she murmured of her childhood, and for the first time
Wang Lung saw into her heart, although even now only |
through such brief words as these:

'I will bring the meats to the door only — and well I J

know I am ugly and cannot appear before the great lord ' j

\ And again she said, panting, 'Do not beat me — I will never ?

eat of the dish again ' And she said over and over,

'My father — my mother — my father — my mother ' and !



again and again, 'Well I know I am ugly and cannot be
loved '

When she said this Wang Lung could not bear it and
he took her hand and he soothed it, a big hard hand, stiff
as though it were dead already. And he wondered and \
grieved at himself most of all because what she said was(
true, and even he took her hand, desiring truly that she\
feel his tenderness towards her, he was ashamed because j
he could feel no tenderness, no melting of the heart such,
as Lotus could win from him with a pout of her lips, i
When he took this* stiff dying hand he did not love it, andl
even his pity was spoiled with repulsion towards it.

And because of this, he was more kind to her and he
bought her special food and delicate soups made of white
fish and the hearts of young cabbages. Moreover, he could
not take his pleasure of Lotus, for when he went in to her
to distract his mind from its despair over this long agony
of dying, he could not forget O-lan, and even as he held
Lotus, he loosed her, because of O-lan.

There were times when O-lan woke to herself and to
what was about her and once she called for Cuckoo, and
when in great astonishment Wang Lung summoned the
woman, O-lan raised herself trembling upon her arm, and
she said plainly enough:

'Well, and you may have lived in the courts of the
Old Lord, and you were accounted beautiful, but I have
been a man's wife and I have borne him sons, and you
are still a slave.'

When Cuckoo would have answered angrily to this,
Wang Lung besought her and led her out, saying:

'That one does not know what words mean now/

When he went back into the room, O-lan still leaned
her head upon her arm and she said to him :

' After I am dead that one nor her mistress neither is
to come into my room or touch my things, and if they do,
I will send my spirit back for a curse.' Then she fell into .
heF fitful sleep, and her head dropped upon the pillow.

But one day before the New Year broke, she was sud-
denly better, as a candle flickers brightly at its end, and



she was herself as she had not been and she sat up in bed
and twisted her hair for herself, and she asked for tea to
drink, and when Wang Lung came she said:

'Now the New Year is coming and there are no cakes
and no meats ready, and I have thought of a thing. I will
not have that slave in my kitchen, but I would have you
send for my daughter-in-law, who is betrothed to our eldest
son. I have not seen her yet, but when she comes I will
tell her what to do/

Wang Lung was pleased' at her strength, although he
cared nothing for festivities on this year, and he sent Cuckoo
in to beseech Liu, the grain merchant, seeing how sad the
case was. And after a while Liu was willing when he heard
that O-lan would not live the winter out, perhaps, and after
all the girl was sixteen and older than some who go to
their husband's houses.

But because of O-lan there were no feastings. The maiden
came quietly in a sedan chair, except that her mother and
an old servant came with her, and her mother went back
when she had delivered the maiden to O-lan, but the
servant remained for the maiden's use.

Now the children were moved from the room where they
had slept and that room was given to the new daughter-
in-law, and all was arranged as it should be. Wang Lung
did not speak with the maiden, since it was not fitting, but
he inclined his head gravely when she bowed and he was
pleased with her, for she knew her duty and she moved
about the house quietly with her eyes downcast. Moreover,
she was a goodly maid, fair enough, but not too fair so as
to be vain over it. She was careful and correct in all her
behaviour, and she went into O-lan's room and tended her,
and this eased Wang Lung of his pain for his wife, because
now there was a woman about her bed, and O-lan was very
content.

O-lan was content for three days and more and then
she thought of another thing and she said to Wang Lung
when he came in the morning to see how she did through
the night:

'There is another thing before I can die.'
To this he replied angrily:



'You cannot speak of dying and please meP

She smiled slowly then, the same slow smile that ended
before it reached her eyes, and she answered:

'Die I must, for I feel it in my vitals waiting, but I
will not die before my eldest son comes home and before
he weds this good maid who is my daughter-in-law, and
well she serves me, holding the hot water basin steadily
and knowing when to bathe my face when I sweat in pain.
Now I want my son to come home, because I must die,
and I want him to wed this maid first, so that I may die
easily, knowing your grandson is stirred into life and a
great-grandson for the old one.'

Now these were many words for her at any time, even
in health, and she said them more sturdily than she had'
said anything for many moons, and Wang Lung was
cheered at the strength in her voice and with what vigour
she desired this, and he would not cross her, although he
would have liked more time for a great wedding for his
eldest son. He only said heartily to her therefore:

'Well, and we will do this thing, and to-day I will send
a man south and he shall search for my son and bring him
home to be wed. And then you must promise me that you
will gather your strength again and give over dying and
grow well, for [the house is like a cave for beasts without
you.' 7

This he said to please her and it pleased her, although
she did not speak again, but lay back and closed her eyes,
smiling a little.

Wang Lung dispatched the man, therefore, and told
him:

'Tell your young lord that his mother is dying and her
spirit cannot rest in ease until she sees him and sees him
wed, and if he values me and his mother and his home, he
must come back before he draws another breath, for on
the third day from now I will have feasts prepared and
guests invited and he will be wed.'

And as Wang Lung said, so he did. He bade Cuckoo
provide a feast as best she could, and she was to call in
cooks from the tea-shop in town to help her, and he poured
silver into her hands and he said :



213



'Do as it would have been done in the great house at
such an hour, and there is more silver than this.'

Then he went into the village and invited guests, men
and women, every one whom he knew, and he went into
the town and invited whom he knew at the tea-shops and
at the grain markets and every one whom he knew. And
he said to his uncle:

'Ask whom you will for my son's marriage, any of your
friends or any of your son's friends.'

This he said because he remembered always who his
uncle was and Wang Lung was courteous to his uncle and
treated him as an honoured guest, and so he had done
from the hour when he knew who his uncle was.

On the night of the day before his marriage, Wang
Lung's eldest son came home, and he came striding into the
room and Wang Lung forgot all that the young man had
troubled him when he was at home. For two years and
more had passed since he saw this son of his, and here he
was and no longer a lad, but a tall man and a goodly one,
with a great square body and high ruddy cheeks and short
black hair, shining and oiled. And he wore a long dark
red gown of satin such as one finds in the shops of the
south, and a short black velvet jacket without sleeves, and
Wang Lung's heart burst with pride to see his son, and he
forgot everything except this, his goodly son, and he led
him to his mother.

Then the young man sat beside his mother's bed and
the tears stood in his eyes to see her thus, but he would
not say anything except cheerful things such as these, 'You
look twice as well as they said and years away from death.'
But O-lan said simply:

£ I will see you wed and then I must die.'

Now the maid who was to be wed must not of course
be seen by the young man and Lotus took her into the
inner court to prepare her for marriage, and none could do
this better than Lotus and Cuckoo and the wife of Wang
Lung's uncle. These three took the maid and on the morn-
ing of her wedding-day they washed her clean from head
to foot, and bound her feet freshly with new white cloths
under her new stockings, and Lotus rubbed into her flesh



214



some fragrant almond oil of her own. Then they dressed
her in garments she had brought from her home; white
flowered silk next her sweet virgin flesh and then a light
coat of sheep's wool of the finest and most curling kind,
and then the red satin garments of marriage. And they
rubbed lime upon her forehead and with a string tied skil-
fully they pulled out the hairs of her virginity, the fringe
over her brow, and they made her forehead high and
smooth and square for her new estate. Then they painted
her with powder and with red paint, and with a brush they
drew out in two long slender lines her eyebrows, and they
set upon her head the bride's crown and the beaded veil,
and upon her small feet they put shoes, embroidered, and
they painted her finger-tips and scented the palms of her
hands, and thus they prepared her for marriage. To every-
thing the maid was acquiescent, but reluctant and shy as
was proper and correct for her to be.

Then Wang Lung and his uncle and his father and the
guests waited in the middle room and the maid came in
supported by her own slave and by the wife of Wang
Lung's uncle, and she came in modestly and correctly with
her head bowed, and she walked as though she were un-
willing to wed a man and must be supported to it. This
showed her great modesty and Wang Lung was pleased
and said to himself that she was a proper maid.

After this W r ang Lung's eldest son came in dressed as
he had been in his red robe and his black jacket and his
hair was smooth and his face fresh shaven. Behind him
came his two brothers, and W 7 ang Lung, seeing them, was
fit to burst with pride at this procession of his goodly sons,
who were to continue after him the life of his body. Now
the old man, who had not understood what was happening
at all and could hear only the fragments of what was shouted
to him, now suddenly he understood, and he cackled out
with cracked laughter and he said over and over in his
piping old voice:

'There is a marriage and a marriage is children again
and grandchildren!'

And he laughed so heartily that the guests all laughed
to see his mirth and Wang Lung thought to himself that if



2T 5



only O-lan had been up from her bed it would have been
a merry day.

All this time Wang Lung looked secretly and sharply
at his son to see if he glanced at the maid, and the young
man did glance secretly and from the corner of his eyes,
but it was enough, for he grew pleased and merry in his
ways and Wang said proudly to himself :

'Well, and I have chosen one he likes for him.'

Then the young man and the maid together bowed to
the old man and to Wang Lung, and then they went into
the room where O-lan lay, and she had caused herself to
be dressed in her good black coat and she sat up when j
they came in and on her face there burned two fiery spots
of red, which Wang Lung mistook for health, so that he
said loudly, 'Now she will be well yet!'

And the two young persons went up and bowed to her j
and she patted the bed and said: s

'Sit here and drink the wine and eat the rice of your i
marriage, for I would see it all and this will be your bed j
of marriage since I am soon to be finished with it and
carried away.'

Now none would answer her when she spoke thus but
the two sat down side by side, shy of each other and in
silence, and the wife of Wang Lung's uncle came in, fat
and important with the occasion, bearing two bowls of hot
wine, and the two drank separately, and then mingled the
wine of the two bowls and drank again, thus signifying that
the two were now one, and they ate rice and mingled the
rice and this signified that their life was now one, and thus
they were wed. Then they bowed again to O-lan and to
Wang Lung and then they went out and together they
bowed to the assembled guests.

Then the feasting began and the rooms and the courts
were filled with tables and with the smell of cooking and
with the sound of laughter, for the guests came from far
and wide, those whom Wang Lung had invited and with
them many whom Wang Lung had never seen, since it was
known he was a rich man and food would never be missed
or counted in his house at such a time. And Cuckoo had
brought cooks from the town to prepare the feast, for there

216



were to be many delicacies such as cannot be prepared in
a farmer's kitchen and the town cooks came bearing great
baskets of food ready cooked and only to be heated, and
they made much of themselves and flourished their grimy
aprons and bustled here and there in their zeal. And every
one ate more and yet more and drank all he was able to
hold, and they were all very merry.

O-lan would have all the doors open and the curtains
drawn so that she could hear the noise and the laughter
and could smell the food, and she said again and again to
Wang Lung, who came in often to see how she did:

'And has every one wine? And is the sweet rice dish
in the middle of the feast very hot and have they put full
measure of lard and sugar into it and the eight fruits?'

When he assured her that everything was as she wished
it, she was content and lay listening.

Then it w T as over and the guests were gone and night
came. And with the silence over the house and with the
ebbing of merriment strength passed from O-lan and she
grew weary and faint and she called to her the two who
had been wed that day and she said:

'Now I am content and this thing in me may do as it ]
will. My son, look to your father and your grandfather,
and my daughter, look to your husband and your husband's I
father and his grandfather and the poor fool in the court,
there is she. And you have no duty to any other.'

This last she said, meaning Lotus, to whom she had
never spoken. Then she seemed to fall into a fitful sleep, I
although they waited for her to speak further, and once
more she roused herself to speak. Yet when she spoke it
was as though she did not know they were there or indeed
where she was, for she said, muttering and turning her $
head this way and that and her eyes closed:

'Well, and if I am ugly, still I have borne a son; although
I am but a slave there is a son in my house.' And again f I
she said, suddenly. 'How can that one feed him and care J j
for him as I do? Beauty will not bear a man sons!'

And she forgot them all and lay muttering. Then Wang
Lung motioned to them to go away, and he sat beside
her while she slept and woke, and he looked at her. And



217



he hated himself because even as she lay dying he saw how
wide and ghastly her purpled lips drew back from her teeth.
Then as he looked she opened her eyes wide and it seemed
there was some strange mist over them, for she stared at
him full and stared again, wondering and fixing her eyes
on him, as though she wondered who he was. Suddenly
her head dropped off the round pillow where it^ay, and
she shuddered and was dead.

Once she lay dead it seemed to Wang Lung that he
could not bear to be near O-lan, and he called his uncle's
wife to wash the body for burial, and when it was finished
he would not go in again, but he allowed his uncle's wife
and his eldest son and his daughter-in-law to lift the body
from the bed and set in into the great coffin he had bought.
But to comfort himself he busied himself in going to the I
town and calling men to seal the coffin according to custom
and he went and found a geomancer and asked him for a
lucky day for burials. He found a good day three months
hence and.it was the first good day the geomancer could
find, so Wang Lung paid the man and went to the temple
in the town and he bargained with the abbot there and
rented a space for a coffin for three months, and there was
O-lan's coffin brought to rest until the day of burial, for it
seemed to Wang Lung he could not bear to have it under
his eyes in the house.

Then Wang Lung was scrupulous to do all that should
be done for the one dead, so he caused mourning to be
made for himself and for his children, and their shoes were
made of coarse white cloth, which is the colour of mourning,
and about their ankles they bound bands of white cloth,
and the women in the house bound their hair with white
cord.

After this Wang Lung could not bear to sleep in the
room where O-lan had died and he took his possessions
and moved altogether into the inner court where Lotus
lived and he said to his eldest son :

'Go with your wife into that room where your mother
lived and died, who conceived and bore you, and beget
there your own sons.'

218



So the two moved into it and were content.

Then as though death could not easily leave the house
where it had come once, the old man, Wang Lung's father,
who had been distraught ever since he saw them putting
the stiff dead body of O-lan into the coffin, lay down on
his bed one night for sleeping, and when the second daugh-
ter came in to him in the morning to bring him his tea,
there he lay on his bed, his scattered old beard thrust up
into the air, and his head thrown back in death.

She cried out at the sight and ran crying to her father,
and Wang Lung came in and found the old man so; his
light, stiff old body was dry and cold and thin as a gnarled
pine tree and he had died hours before, perhaps as soon
as he had laid himself upon the bed. Then Wang Lung
washed the old man himself and he laid him gently in the
coffin he had bought for him and he had jt sealed and he
said:

'On the same day we will bury these two dead from
our house and I will take a good piece of my hill land
and we will bury them there together and when I die I
will be laid there also.'

So he did what he said he would dp. When he had
sealed the old man's coffin he set it upon two benches in
the middle room and there it stood until the appointed
day came. And it seemed to Wang Lung that it was a
comfort to the old man to be there, even dead, and be
felt near to his father in the coffin, for Wang Lung grieved
for his father, but not unto death, because his father was
very old and full of years, and for many years had been
but half alive.

Then on the day appointed by the geomancer in the
full of the spring of the year Wang Lung called priests
from the Taoist temple and they came dressed in their
yellow robes and their long hair knotted on their crowns, /
and he called priests from the Buddhist temples and they
came in their long grey robes, their heads shaven and set
with the nine sacred scars, and these priests beat drums
and chanted the whole night through for the two who
were dead. And whenever they stopped their chanting j
Wang Lung poured silver into their hands and they took (

219



breath again and chanted and did not cease until dawn
rose.

Now Wang Lung had chosen a good place in his fields
under a date tree upon a hill to set the graves, and Ching
had the graves dug and ready and a wall of earth made
about the graves, and there was space within the walls for
the body of Wang Lung and for each of his sons and
their wives, and there was space for sons' sons, also. This
land Wang Lung did not begrudge, even though it was
high land and good for wheat, because it was a sign of
the establishment of his family upon their own land. Dead
and alive they would rest upon their own land.

Then on the appointed day after the priests had finished
the night of chanting, Wang Lung dressed himself in a
robe of white sack-cloth and he gave a robe like it to his
uncle and his uncle's son, and to his own sons each a robe,
and to his son's wife and to his own two daughters. He
called chairs from the town to carry them, for it was not
meet that they walk to the place of burial as though he
were a poor man and a common fellow. So for the first
time he rode on men's shoulders and behind the coffin
where O-lan was. But behind his father's coffin his uncle
I rode first. Even Lotus, who in O-lan's lifetime could not
appear before her, now that O-lan was dead, came riding
jin a chair in order that before others she might appear
\ dutiful to the first wife of her husband. So for his uncle's
wife and for his uncle's son, Wang Lung hired chairs also
and for all of them he had robes of sackcloth, and even
for the poor fool he made a robe and hired a chair and
put her in it, although she was sorely bewildered and laugh-
ed shrilly when there should have been only weeping.

Then, mourning and weeping loudly, they went to the
graves, the labourers and Ching following and walking and
wearing white shoes. And Wang Lung stood beside the
two graves. He had caused the coffin of O-lan to be brought
from the temple and it was put on the ground to await
the old man's burial first. And Wang Lung stood and
watched and his grief was hard and dry, and he would not
cry out loud as others did, for there were no tears in his
eyes, because it seemed to him that what had come about



i was come about, and there was nothing to be done more

than he had done.

s 1 But when the earth was covered over and the graves
! j smoothed, he turned away silently and he sent away the
chair and he walked home alone with himself. And out of
! his heaviness there stood out strangely but one clear thought
i and it was a pain to him, and it was this : that he wished
I he had not taken the two pearls from O-lan that day when
I she was washing his clothes at the pool, and he would
never bear to see Lotus put them in her ears again.

Thus, thinking heavily, he went on alone and he said
to himself:

pThere n that land of mine is buried the first good half
i of my life and more. It is as though half of me were buried
there, and now it is a. different life in my house/ T

And suddenly he wept a little, and he dried his eyes
with the back of his hand, as a child does.



XXVII

DURING ALL THIS TIME WANG LUNG HAD SCARCELY
! thought pf what the harvests were, so busy had he been
| with the wedding feasts and funerals in his house, but one
day Ching came to him and he said :

'Now that the joy and sorrow are over, I have that to
tell you about the land.'

'Say on, then,' Wang Lung answered. 'I have scarcely
thought whether I had land or noc these days except to
bury my dead in.'

Ching waited in silence for a few minutes in respect to
Wang Lung when he spoke thus, and then he said softly:

'Now may Heaven avert it, but it looks as though there
would be such a flood this year as never was, for the water
is swelling up over the land, although it is not summer yet,
and too early for it to come like this.'

But Wang Lung said stoutly:

'I have never had any good from that old man in heaven,
yet. Incense or no incense, he is the same in evil. Let us
go and see the land.' And as he spoke he rose.



Now Ching was a fearful and timid man and however
bad the times were he did not dare as Wang Lung did to
exclaim against heaven., He only said 'Heaven wills it,'
and he accepted flood and drought with meekness. Not so
Wang Lung. He went out on his land, on this piece and
that, and he saw it was as Ching said. All those pieces
along the moat along the waterways, which he had bought
from the Old Lord of the House of Hwang, were wet and
mucky from the full water oozing up from the bottom, so
that the good wheat on this land had turned sickly and
yellow.

The moat itself was like a lake and the canals were i
rivers, swift and curling in small eddies and whirlpools, and j
even a fool could see that with summer rains not yet come,
there would be that year a mighty flood and men and
women and children starving again. Then Wang Lung ran
hastily here and there over his land and Ching came silently
as a shadow behind him, and they estimated together which
land could be planted to rice and which land before the
young rice could be put on it would already be under water.
And looking at the canals brimming already to the edge of
their banks, Wang Lung cursed and said:
fT'Now that old man in heaven will enjoy himself, for he
/will look down and see people drowned and starving and
that is what the accursed one likes/

This he said loudly and angrily so that Ching shivered
and said:

I c Even so, he is greater than any one of us and do not

I talk so, my master/

But since he was rich Wang Lung was carelesvaiid he
was as angry as he liked and he muttered as he walked
homeward to think of the water swelling up over his land _
and over his good crops.

Then it all came to pass as Wang Lung had foreseen.
The river to the north burst its dykes, its furthermost dykes
first, and when men saw what had happened, they hurried
from this place to that to collect money to mend it, and
every man gave as he was able, for it was to the interest
of all to keep the river within its bounds. The money they
entrusted, then, to the magistrate in the district, a man



222



new and just come. Now this magistrate was a poor man
and had not seen so much money in his life time before,
being only newly risen to his position through the bounty
of his father, who had put all his money he had and could
borrow to buy this place for his son, so that from it the
family might acquire some wealth. When the river burst
again the people went howling and clamouring to this
magistrate's house, because he had not done what he pro-
mised and mended the dykes, and he ran and hid himself
because the money he had spent in his own house, even
three thousand pieces of silver. And the common people
burst into his house howling and demanding his life for
what he had done, and when he saw he would be killed
he ran and jumped into the water and drowned himself,
and thus the people were appeased. _

But still the money was gone, and the river burst yet
Another dyke and another before it was content with the «'
space it had for itself, and then it wore away these walls J
of earth until none could tell where a dyke had been in that t
whole country, and the river swelled and rolled like a sea
over all the good farming land, and the wheat and the^
young rice were at the bottom of the sea.

One by one the villages were made into islands, and
men watched the water rising and when it came within two
feet of their doorways they bound their tables and beds
together and put the doors of their houses upon them for
rafts, and they piled what they could of their bedding and
their clothes and their women and children on these rafts.
And the water rose into the earthen houses and softened
the walls and burst them apart and they melted down into
the water and were as if they had never been. And then
as the water on earth drew water from heaven it rained as
though the earth were in drought. Day after day it rained.

Wang Lung sat in his doorway and looked out over the
waters that were yet far enough from his house that was
built on a high wide hill. But he saw the waters covering
his land and he watched lest it cover the new-made graves,
but it did not, although the waves of the yellow clay-laden
water lapped about the dead hungrily.

There were no harvests of any kind that year and every-



223



where people starved and were hungry and were angry,
at what had befallen them yet again. Some went south, f
and some who were bold and angry and cared nothing for s
what they did joined the robber bands that flourished every- c
where in the countryside. These even tried to beleaguer , j
the town so that the townspeople locked the gates of the j
wall continually except for one small gate called the western t
water gate, and this was watched by soldiers and locked at j |
night also. And besides those who robbed and those who) >
went south to work and to beg, even as Wang Lung had
once gone with his old father and his wife and children,
there were others who were old and tired and timid, and
who had no sons like Ching, and these stayed and starved
and ate grass and what leaves they could find on high ;
places and many died upon the land and water.

Then Wang Lung saw that a famine such as he had j
never seen was upon the land, for the water did not recede
in time to plant the wheat for winter and there could be
no harvest then the next year. And he looked well to his
own house and to the spending of money and food, and j
he quarrelled heartily with Guckoo because for a long time j
she would still buy meat in the town, and he was glad at
last, since there must be flood, that the water kept between
his house and the town, so that she could no longer go to
market when she would, for he would not allow the boats
to be put forth except when he said, and Ching listened to
him and not to Cuckoo, for all her sharpness of tongue.

Wang Lung allowed nothing to be bought and sold after i
the winter came except what he said, and he husbanded
carefully all that they had. Every day he gave out to his
daughter-in-law what food was needed in the house for that
day, and to Ching he gave out what the labourers should
have, although it hurt him to feed idle men, and it hurt |
him so greatly that at last when winter cold came and the
water froze over, he bade the men begone to the south to
beg and to labour until the spring came when they might
return to him. Only to Lotus he gave secretly sugar and
oil, because she was not accustomed to hardship. Even on
the New Year they did eat but a fish they caught them-
selves in the lake and a pig they killed from the farm,

224



Now Wang Lung was not so poor as he wished to seem,
for he had good silver hidden away in the walls where his
son slept with his wife, though his son and daughter-in-law
did not know it, and he had good silver and even some
gold hidden in a jar at the bottom of the lake under his
nearest field, and he had some hidden among the roots of
the bamboos, and he had grains from the year before which
he had not sold at market, and there was no danger of
starvation in his house.

But all around him there were people starving, and he
remembered the cries of the starving at the gate of the
great house once when he passed, and he knew that there
were many who hated him well because he had still that
which he could eat and feed to his children, and so he
kept his gates barred and he let none in whom he did not
know. But still he knew very well that even this could notf
have saved him in these times of robbers and lawlessness^
if it had not been for his uncle. Well did Wang Lung
know that if it had not been for his uncle's power he would
have been robbed and sacked for his food and for his
money and for the women in his house. So he was court-
eous to his uncle and to his uncle's son and to his uncle's
wife and the three were like guests in his house and they
drank tea before others and dipped first with their chop-
sticks into the bowls at meal time.

Now these three saw well enough that Wang Lung was
afraid of them and they grew haughty and demanded this
and that and complained of what they ate and drank. And
especially did the woman complain, for she missed the de-
licacies she had eaten in the inner courts and she com-
plained to her husband and the three of them complained
to Wang Lung.

Now Wang Lung saw that although his uncle himself
grew old and lazy and careless and would not have troubled
to complain if he had been let alone, yet the young man,
his son, and his mother goaded him, and one day when
Wang Lung stood at the gate he heard these two urging
the old man:

'Well, and he has money and food, and let us demand
silver of him.' And the woman said, 'We will never have

225

5056, 15.



such a hold as this again, for well he knows that if you I
were not his uncle and the brother of his father he would
be robbed and sacked and his house left empty and a
ruin, since you stand next to the head of the Red Beards.'

Wang Lung standing there secretly and hearing this
grew so angry that his skin was like to burst on him, but
he was silent with great effort and he tried to plan what
he could do with these three, but he could think of nothing
to do. When, therefore, his uncle came to him next day
saying, 'Well, and my good nephew, give me a handful of
silver to buy me a pipe and a bit of smoke and my woman
is ragged and needs a new coat,' he could say nothing
but he handed the old man the five pieces of silver from
his girdle, although he gnashed his teeth secretly, and it
seemed to him that never in the old days when silver was
rare with him had it gone from him so unwillingly.

Then before two days were passed his uncle was at
him again and again for silver and Wang Lung shouted
at last:

c Well, and shall we all starve soon?'

And his uncle laughed and said carelessly:

'You are under a good heaven. There are men less rich
than you who hang from the burnt rafters of their houses.'

When Wang Lung heard this, cold sweat broke out
on him and he gave the silver without a word. And so, j
although they went without meat in the house, these three
must eat meat, and although Wang Lung himself scarcely
tasted tobacco, his uncle puffed unceasingly at his pipe.

Now Wang Lung's eldest son had been engrossed in*
his marriage and he scarcely saw what happened except
that he guarded his wife jealously from the gaze of his
cousin so that now these two were no longer friends but
enemies. Wang Lung's son scarcely let his wife stir from
their room except in the evenings when the other man was
gone with his father and during the day he made her stay
shut in the room. But when he saw these three doing as
they would with his father he grew angry, for he was of a
quick temper, and he said:

"Well, and if you care more for these three tigers than
you do for your son and his wife, the mother of your

226 I



grandsons, it is a strange thing and we had better set up
our own house elsewhere.'

Wang Lung told him plainly then what he had told no
one:

'I hate these three worse than my life and if I could
think of a way I would do it. But your uncle is lord of a
horde of wild robbers, and if I feed him and coddle him
we are safe, and no one can show anger toward them.'

Now when the eldest son heard this he stared until
his eyes hung out of his head, but when he had thought
of it for a while he was more angry than ever and he
said:

'How is this for a way? Let us push them all into the
water one night. Ching can push the woman for she is
fat and soft and helpless, and I will push the young one
my cousin, whom I hate enough for he is always peeping
at my wife, and you can push the man.'

But Wang Lung could not kill; although he would rather
have killed his uncle than his ox, he could not kill even
when he hated and he said:

JNo, and even if I could do this thing, to push my (
father's brother into the water I would not, for if the other
robbers heard of it what should we do, and if he lives we
are safe, and if he is gone we are become as other people
who have a little and so are in danger in such times as
these.'

Then the two of them fell silent, each thinking heavily
what to do, and the young man saw that his father was
right and death was too easy for the trouble and that there -
must be another way. And Wang Lung spoke aloud at
last, musing:

'If there were a way that we would keep them here
but make them harmless and undesiring what a thing it
would be, but there is no such magic as this!'

Then the young man smote his two hands together and
cried out:

'Well, and you have told me what to do! Let us buy
them opium to enjoy, and more opium, and let them have
their will of it as rich people do. I will seem to be friends
with my cousin again and I will entice him away to the



227



tea-house in the town where one can smoke and we can t(
buy it for my uncle and his wife.'

But Wang Lung, since he had not thought of the thing j
first himself, was doubtful.

c It will cost a great deal,' he said slowly, 'for opium is i
as dear as jade.'

'Well, and it is dearer than jade to have them at us
like this,' the young man argued, c and to endure besides i
their haughtiness and the young man peeping at my wife.' i

But Wang Lung would not at once consent, for it was
not so easy a thing to do, and would cost a good bag of
silver to do it.

It is doubtful whether the thing would ever have been
done and they would have gone as they were until the
waters chose to recede had not a thing happened.

This thing was that the son of Wang Lung's uncle. cast
his eyes upon the second daughter of Wang Lung, who
was his cousin and by blood the same as his sister. Now
the second daughter of Wang Lung was an exceedingly 1
pretty girl, and she looked like the second son who was a
merchant, but with her smallness and lightness, and she
had not his yellow skin. Her skin was fair and pale as al-
mond flowers and she had a little nose and thin red lips i
and her feet were small.

Her cousin laid hold of her one night when she passed
alone through the court from the kitchen. He laid hold of
her roughly and he pressed his hand into her bosom and
she screamed out, and Wang Lung ran out and beat the
man about the head, but he was like a dog with a piece
of stolen meat that he would not drop, so that Wang Lung
had to tear his daughter away. Then the man laughed thickly
and he said:

'It is only play and is she not my sister? Can a man
do any evil with his sister?' But his eyes glittered with
lust as he spoke and Wang Lung muttered and pulled the
girl away and sent her into her own room.

And Wang Lung told his son that night what had come
about, and the young man was grave and he said:

c We must send the maid into the town to the home of
her betrothed; even if the merchant Liu says it is a year

228



too evil for wedding we must send her, lest we cannot
keep her virgin with this hot tiger in the house.'

So Wang Lung did. He went the next day into the town
and to the house of the merchant and he said :

'My daughter is thirteen years old and no longer a child
and she is fit for marriage.'

But Liu was hesitant and he said:

'I have not enough profit this year to begin a family
in my house.'

Now Wang Lung was ashamed to say. 'There is the son
of my uncle in the house and he is a tiger,' so he said only:

'I would not have the care of this maid upon me, be-
cause her mother is dead and she is pretty and is of an
age to conceive, and my house is large and full of this and
that, and I cannot watch her every hour. Since she is to
be your family, let her virginity be guarded here, and let
her be wed soon or late as you like.'

Then the merchant, being a lenient and kindly man,
replied :

'Well, and if this is how it is, let the maid come and I
will speak to my son's mother, and she can come and be
safe here in. the courts with her mother-in-law, and after
the next harvest or so, she can be wed.'

Thus the matter was settled and Wang Lung was well
content, and he went away.

But on his way back to the gate in the wall, where
Ching held a boat waiting for him, Wang Lung passed a
shop where tobacco and opium are sold, and he went in
to buy himself a little shredded tobacco to put in his water
pipe in the evenings, and as the clerk had it on the scales,
he said half unwillingly to the man:

'And how much is your opium if you have it?'

And the clerk said:

'It is not lawful in these days to sell it over the counter,
and we do not sell it so, but if you wish to buy it and have
the silver, it is weighed out in the -room behind this, an
ounce for a silver piece.'

Then Wang Lung would not think further what he did,
but he said quickly:

'I will take six ounces of it.'



229



XXVIII



THEN AFTER THE SECOND DAUGHTER WAS SENT AWAY
and Wang Lung was free of his anxiety about her, he said
to his uncle one day:

'Since you are my father's brother, here is a little better
tobacco for you.'

And he opened the jar of opium and the stuff was sticky
and sweet smelling and Wang Lung's uncle took it and
smelled of it, and he laughed and was pleased and he said :

'Well now, I have smoked it a little but not often before
this, for it is too dear, but I like it well enough.'

And Wang Lung answered him, pretending to be care-
less :

'It is only a little I bought once for my father when
he grew old and could not sleep at night and I found it
to-day unused and I thought: 'There is my father's brother,
and why should he not have it before me, who am younger
and do not need it yet?' Take it then, and smoke it when
you wish or when you have a little pain.'

Then Wang Lung's uncle took it greedily, for it was
sweet to smell and a thing that only rich men used, and
he took it and bought a pipe and he smoked the opium,
lying all day upon his bed to do it. Then Wang Lung
saw to it that there were pipes bought and left here and
there and he pretended to smoke himself, but he only took
a pipe to his room and left it there cold. And his two sons
in the house and Lotus he would not allow to touch the
opium, saying as his excuse that it was too dear, but he
urged it upon his uncle and upon his uncle's wife and son,
and the courts were filled with the sweetish smell of the
smoke, and the silver for this Wang Lung did not begrudge
because it bought him peace.

Now as the winter wore away and the waters began to
recede so that Wang Lung could walk abroad over his
land it happened one day that his eldest son followed him
and said to him proudly:

'Well, and there will soon be another mouth in the
house and it will be the mouth of your grandson.'



230



y

Then Wang Lung, when he heard this, turned himself
about and he laughed and he rubbed his hands together
and said:

'Here is a good day indeed!'

And he laughed again, and went to find Ching and
tell him to go to the town to buy some fish and good food
and he sent it in to his son's wife and said:
'Eat, make strong the body of my grandson.'
Then all during the spring Wang Lung had the know-
ledge of this birth to come for his comfort. And when he
was busy about other things he thought of it, and when he
was troubled he thought of it and it was a comfort to him.

And as the spring grew into summer, the people who
had gone aw y from the floods came back again, one by
one and group by group, spent and weary with the winter
and glad to be back, although where their houses had been
| there was nothing now but the yellow mud of the water-
soaked land. But out of this mud houses could be fashioned
again, and mats brought to roof them, and many came to 1 '
Wang Lung to borrow money, and he loaned it at high f
interest, seeing how greatly it was in demand, and the 1
security he always said must be land. And with the money
they borrowed they planted seed upon the earth that was
fat with the richness of the dried water, and when they
iieeded oxen and seed and ploughs and when they could
borrow no more money, some sold land and part of their
fields that they might plant what was left. And of these
Wang Lung bought land and much land, and he bought
it cheaply, ' since money men must have.

But there were some who would not sell their land, and
when they had nothing wherewith to buy seed and ploughs
and oxen, they sold their daughters, and there were those
who came to Wang Lung to sell, because it was known he
was rich and powerful and a man of good heart.

And he, thinking constantly of the child to come and
of others to come from his sons when they were all wed,
bought five slaves, two about twelve years of age with big
feet and strong bodies, and two younger to wait upon them
all and fetch and carry, and one to wait on the person of
Lotus, for Cuckoo grew old and since the second girl was

231



gone there had been none other to work in the house.
And the five he bought in one day, for he was a man rich
enough to do quickly what he decided upon.

Then one day many days later a man came bearing a
small, delicate maid of seven years or so, wanting to sell
her, and Wang Lung said he would not have her at first,
for she was so small and weak. But Lotus saw her and
fancied her and she said pettishly :

'Now this one 1 will have because she is so pretty and
the other one is coarse and smells like goat's meat and I
do not like her.'

And Wang Lung looked at the child and saw her pretty
frightened eyes and her piteous thinness and he said partly
to humour Lotus and partly that he might see the child
fed and fattened:

' Well, and let it be so if you wish it.'

So he bought the child for twenty pieces of silver and
she lived in the inner courts and slept on the foot of the
bed where Lotus slept.

Now it seemed to Wang Lung that he could have peace
in his house. When the waters receded and summer came
and the land was to be planted to good seed, he walked
hither and thither and looked at every piece and he discussed
with Ching the quality of each piece of soil and what change
there should be of crops for the fertility of the land. And
whenever he went he took with him his youngest son, who
was to be on the land after him, that the lad might learn.
And Wang Lung never looked to see how the lad listened
and whether he listened or not, for the lad walked with his
head downcast and he had a sullen look on his face, and
no one knew what he thought.

But Wang Lung did not see what the lad did, only that
he walked there in silence behind his father. And when
everything was planned Wang Lung went back to his
house well content and he said to his own heart :

'I am no longer young and it is not necessary for me
to work any more with my hands since I have men on my
land and my sons and peace in my house.'

Yet when he went into his house there was no peace.



Although he had given his son a wife and although he had
bought slaves enough to serve them all, and although his
uncle and his uncle's wife were given enough of opium for
their pleasure all day, still there was no peace. And again
it was because of his uncle's son and his own eldest son.

It seemed as though Wang Lung's eldest son could never
give over his hatred of his cousin or his deep suspicion
of his cousin's evil. He had seen well enough with his
own eyes in his youth that the man, his cousin, was full of
all sorts of evil, and things had come to a pass where
Wang Lung's son would not even leave the house to go to
the tea-shop unless the cousin went also, and he watched
the cousin and left only when he left. And he suspected
the man of evil with the slaves and even of evil in the
inner court with Lotus, although this was idle, for Lotus
grew fatter and older every day and had long since given
over caring for anything except her foods and her wines
and would not have troubled to look at the man had he
come near, and she was even glad when Wang Lung came
to her less and less with his age.

Now when Wang Lung entered with his youngest son
from the fields, his eldest son drew his father aside and
he said :

'I will not endure that fellow my cousin in the house
any more with his peepings and his lounging about with
his robes unbuttoned and his eyes on the slaves.' He did
not dare to say further what he thought, 'And even he
dares to peep into the inner courts at your own woman,'
because he remembered with a sickness in his vitals that
he himself had once hung about this woman of his father's,
and now seeing her fat and older as she was, he could not
dream that he had ever done this thing and he was bitterly
ashamed of it and would not for anything have recalled it
to his father's memory. So he was silent of that, and men-
tioned only the slaves.

Wang Lung had come in robustly from the fields and
in high humour because the water was off the land and
the air dry and warm and because he was pleased with his
youngest son that he had gone with him, and he answered,
angry at this fresh trouble in his house:

233



- 'Well, and you are a foolish child to be for ever thinking ro
of this. You have grown fond and too- fond of your wife yc
and it is not seemly* for a man ought not to care for his
wife that his parents gave him above all else in the- m
world. It is not meet for a" man to love his wife with a tl
' foolish and overweening love, as though she were a harlot.' si
Then the young man was stung with this rebuke of si
his father against him, for more than anything he feared I \
any who accused him of behaviour that was not correct, j
as though he were common and ignorant, and he answered c
quickly :

'It is not for my wife. It is because it is unseemly in my <
father's house.'

But Wang Lung did not hear him. He was musing in I 1
anger and he said again:

'And am I never to be done with all this trouble in my
house between male and female? Here am I passing into
my age and my blood cools and I am freed at last from lusts
and I would have a little peace, and must I endure the lusts
and jealousies of my sons?' And then after a little silence, i
he shouted again: 'Well, and what would you have me
do?'

Now the young man had waited patiently enough for
his father's anger to pass, for he had something to say,
and this Wang Lung saw clearly when he shouted: 'What
would you have me do?' The young man then answered
steadily :

'I wish we could leave this house and that we could go
into the town and live. It is not meet that we go on living
in the country like hinds and we could go and we could
leave my uncle and his wife and my cousin . here and we
could live safely in the town behind the gates.'

Wang Lung laughed bitterly and shortly when his son
said this, and he threw the desire of the young man aside
for something worthless and not to be considered.

'This is my house,' he said stoutly, seating himself at the
table and drawing his pipe toward him from where it stood,
'and you may live in it or not. My house and my land it is,
and if it were not for the land we should all starve as the
others did, and you could not walk about in your dainty



2 34



robes idle as a scholar. It is the good land that has made
you something better than a farmer's lad.'

And Wang Lung rose and tramped about loudly in the
middle room and he behaved roughly and he spat upon
the floor and acted as a farmer may, because although one
side of his heart triumphed in his son's fineness, the other
side was robust and scornful of him and this although he
knew he was secretly proud of his son, and proud because
none who looked at this son could dream that he was but
one generation removed from the land itself.

But the eldest son was not ready to give over. He follow-
ed his father saying:

c Well, and there is the old great house of the Hwangs.
The front part of it is filled with this and that of common
people but the inner courts are locked and silent and we
could rent them and live there peacefully and you and my
youngest brother could come to and fro to the land and I
would not be angered by this dog, my cousin.' And then
he persuaded his father and he allowed the tears to come
into his eyes and he forced them upon his cheeks and did
not wipe them away and he said again : 6 Well, and I try
to be a good son and I do not gamble and smoke opium
and I am content with the woman you have given me and
I ask a little of you and it is all.'

Now whether the tears would have alone moved Wang
Lung he did not know, but he was moved by the words
of his son when he said, "the great house of the Hwangs".

Never had Wang Lung forgotten that once he had gone
crawling into that great house and stood ashamed in the
presence of those who lived there so that he was frightened
of even the gateman, and this had remained a memory of
shame to him all his life and he hated it. Through all his
life he had the sense that he was held in the eyes of men
a little lower than those who lived in the town, and when
he stood before the Old Mistress of the great house, this
sense became crisis. So when his son said: 'We could live
on the great house,' the thought leaped into his mind as
though he saw it actually before his eyes, C I could sit on
that seat where that old one sat and from whence she bade
me stand like a serf, and now I could sit there and so call



235



another into my presence.' And he mused and he said to]
himself again, 'This I could do if I wished.'

And he toyed with the thought and he sat silent and
he did not answer his son, but he put tobacco in his pipe
and lit it with a spill that stood ready and he smoked and
he dreamed of what he could do if he wished. So not be-
cause of his son and not because of his uncle's son he
dreamed that he could live, in the House of Hwang, which
was to him for ever the great house.

Therefore although he was not willing at first to say
that he would go or that he would change anything, yet
thereafter he was more than ever displeased with the idle-
ness of his uncle's son, and he watched the man sharply
and he saw that it was true he did cast eyes at the maids
and Wang Lung muttered and said:

'Now I cannot live with this lustful dog in my house.'

And he looked at his uncle and he saw that he grew
thin as he smoked his opium and his skin was yellow with
opium and he was bent and old and he spat blood when
he coughed; and he looked at his uncle's wife and she was
a cabbage of a woman who took eagerly to her opium pipe
and was satisfied with it and drowsy; and these were little
trouble enough now, and the opium had done what Wang
Lung wished it would do.

But here was the uncle's son, this man, still unwed, and
a wild beast for his desires, and he would not yield to
opium easily as the two old ones had done and take out
his lusts in dreams. And Wang Lung would not willingly
let him wed in the house, because of the spawn he would
breed and one like him was enough. Neither would the
man work, since there was no need and none to drive him
to it, unless the hours he spent away at night could be
called work. But even these grew less frequent, for as men
returned to the land order came back to the villages and
to the town arid the robbers withdrew to the hills in the
north-west, and the man would not go with them, pre-
ferring to live on Wang Lung's bounty. Thus he was a
thorn in the household and he hung about everywhere,
talking and idling and yawning, and half dressed even at
noon.



236



One day, therefore, when Wang Lung went into the
town to see his second son at the grain market he asked
him:

'Well, my second son, what say you of the thing your
elder brother desires, that we move into the town to the
great house if we can rent part of it?'

The second son was grown a young man by now and
he had grown smooth and neat and like the other clerks in
the shop, although still small of stature and yellow-skinned
and with crafty eyes, and he answered smoothly:

'It is an excellent thing and it would suit me well, for
then I could wed and have my wife there also and we
would all be under one roof as a great family is.'

Now Wang Lung had done nothing toward the wed-
ding of this son, for he was a cool youth and cool-blooded
and there had. never been any sign of lust in him and
Wang Lung had much else to trouble him. Now, however,
he said in some shame, for he knew he had not done
well by his second son, 'Well, now I have said to myself
this long time that you should be wed, but what with
this thing and that I have not had time, and with this
last famine and having to avoid all feasting.... But now
that men may eat again, the thing shall be done.'

And he cast about secretly in his mind where he should
find a maid. The second son said then :

'Well, and wed I will then, for it is a good thing and
better than spending money on a jade when the need
comes, and it is right for a man to have sons. But do not
get me a wife from a house in town, such as my brother
has,7or she will talk for' ever of what was in her father's
house and make me spend money and it will be an anger
to me.'

Wang Lung heard this with astonishment, for he had
not known that his daughter-in-law was thus, seeing only
that she was a woman careful to be correct in her be-
haviour and fair enough in her looks. But it seemed to
him wise talk and he was rejoiced that his son was sharp and
clever for the saving of money. This lad he had, indeed,
scarcely known at all, for he grew up weak beside the
vigour of the elder brother, and except for his piping

2 37



tales he was not a child or a youth to whom one would
pay great heed, so that when he went into the shop, Wang
Lung forgot him day after day, except to answer when
any one asked him how many children he had, 'Well,
and I have three sons.'

Now he looked at the youth, his second son, and he
saw his smooth-cut hair, oiled and flat, and his clean gown
of small-patterned grey silk, and he saw the youth's neat
movements and steady, secret eyes and he said to himself
in his surprise:

'Well, and this is also my son!' And aloud he said,
'What sort of a maid would you have, then?'

Then the young man answered as smoothly and steadily
as if he had the thing planned before :

'I desire a maid from a village, of good landed family
and without poor relatives, and one who will bring a good
dowry with her, neither plain nor fair to look upon, and a
good cook, so that even though there are servants in the
kitchen she may watch them. And she must be such a one
that if she buys rice it will be enough and not a handful
over and if she buys cloth the garment will be well cut so
that the scraps of cloth left over should lie in the palm of
her hand. Such an one I want.'

Now Wang Lung was the more astonished when he
heard this talk, for here was a young man whose life he
had not seen, even though it was his own son. It was not
such blood as this that ran in his own lusty body when he
was young, nor in the body of his eldest son; yet he admired
the wisdom of the young man and he said laughing:

'Well, and I shall seek such a maid and Ching shall
look for her among the villages.'

- Still laughing, he went away and he went down the
street of the great house and he hesitated between the
stone lions and then, since there was none to stop him, he
went in and the front courts were as he remembered them
when he came in to seek the whore whom he feared for
his son. The trees were hung with drying clothes and
women sat everywhere gossiping as they drove their long
needles back and forth through shoe soles they made, and
children rolled naked and dusty upon the tiles of the

238



courts and the place reeked with the smell of common
people who swarm into the courts of the great when the
great are gone. And he looked towards the door where
the whore had lived, but the door stood ajar and another
lived there now, an old man, and for this Wang Lung was
glad and he went on.

Now Wang Lung in the old days when the great family
were there would have felt himself one of these common
people and against the great and half hating, half fearful
ot them. But now that he land and that he had silver
and gold hidden safely away, he despised these people who
swarmed everywhere, and he said to himself that they were
filthy and he picked his way among them with his nose up
and breathing lightly because of the stink they made. And
he despised them and was against them as though he him-
self belonged to the great house.

He went back through the courts, although it was for
idle curiosity and not because he had decided anything,
but still he went on and at the back he found a gate locked
into a court and beside it an old woman drowsing, and he
looked and he saw that this was the pock-marked wife
of the man who had been gateman. This astonished him,
and he looked at her, whom he had remembered as
buxom and middle-aged, now haggard and wrinkled
and white haired, and her teeth were yellow snags loose
in her jaws, and looking at her thus he saw in a full mo-
ment how many and how swift were the years that had
passed since he was a young man coming with his first-
born son in his arms, and for the first time in his life Wang
Lung felt his age creeping upon him.

Then he said somewhat sadly to the old woman:

'Wake and let me into the gate.'

And the old woman started up blinking and licking her
dry lips, and she said :

'I am not to open except to such as may rent the whole
inner courts.'

And Wang Lung said suddenly :

'Well, and so I may, if the place please me.'

But he did not tell her who he was, only he went in
after her and he remembered the way well and he followed



her. There the courts stood in silence; tiere the little
room where he had left his basket; here the long verandas
supported by the delicate, red varnished pillars. He fol-
lowed her into the great hall itself, and his mind wend
back how quickly over the years past when he had stood^
there waiting to wed a slave of the house. There before
him was the great carven dais where the old lady had sat,;
her fragile, tended body wrapped in silvery satin.

And moved by some strange impulse he went forward
and he sat down where she had sat and he put his hand]
on the table and from the eminence it gave him he lookecU
down on the blearly face of the old hag who blinked at
him and waited in silence for what he would do. Then
some satisfaction he had longed for all his days without
knowing it swelled up in his heart and he smote the table
with his hand he said suddenly :

'This house I will have!'



XXIX

IN THESE DAYS WHEN WANG LUNG HAD DECIDED Aj
thing he could not do it quickly enough. As he grew
older he grew impatient to have done with things and to sit in ]
the latter part of the day at peace and idle and to watch
the late sun and sleep a little after he had strolled about his
land. So he told his elder son what he had decided and he
commanded the young man to arrange the matter, and
he sent for his second son to come and help with the moving
and on a day when they were ready they moved, first Lotus
and Cuckoo and their slaves and goods, and then Wang
Lung's eldest son and his wife and their servants and the j
slaves.

But Wang Lung himself would not go. at once, and he
kept with him his youngest son. When the moment came
for leaving the land whereon he was born he could not do
it easily nor so quickly as he had thought and he said to
his sons when they urged him:

' Well then, prepare a court for me to use alone and on |
a day that I wish I will come, and it will be a day before my J

240



grandson is born, and when I wish I can come back to
my land.'

And when they urged him yet again, he said:

'Well, and there is my poor fool and whether to take her
with me or not I do not know, but take her I must, for there
is no one who will see if she is fed or not unless I do it.'

This Wang Lung said in some reproach to the wife of
his eldest son, for she would not suffer the poor fool near \
her, but was finicking and squeamish and she said, 'Such
an one should not be alive at all, and it is enough to mar \
the child in me to look at her.' And Wang Lung's eldest j
son remembered the dislike of his wife and so now he was
silent and said no more. Then Wang Lung repented his.
reproach and he said mildly:

'I will come when the maid is found who is to wed /
the second son, for it is easier to stay here where Ching is
until the matter in completed.'

The second son, therefore, gave over his urging.

There was left in the house, then, none but the uncle
and his wife and son and Ching and the labouring men,
besides Wang Lung and his youngest son and the fool.
And the uncle and his wife and son moved into the inner
courts where Lotus had been and they took it for their
own, but this did not grieve Wang Lung unduly, for he
saw clearly there were not many days of life left for his
uncle and when the idle old man was dead Wang Lung's
duty to that generation was over and if the younger man
did not do as he was told none would blame Wang Lung
if he cast him out. Then Ching moved into the outer
rooms and the laboures with him, and Wang Lung and
his son and the fool lived in the middle rooms, and Wang
Lung hired a stout woman to be servant to them.

And Wang Lung slept and rested himself and took no
heed of anything, for he was suddenly very weary and the
house was peaceful. There was none to trouble him, for
his youngest son was a silent lad who kept out o£ his
father's way and Wang Lung scarcely knew what he was,
so silent a lad was he.

But at last Wang Lung stirred himself to bid Ching
find a maid for his second son to wed.

241

5056, 16.



Now Ching grew old and withered and lean as a reed,
but there was the strength of an old and faithful dog in]
him yet, although Wang Lung would no longer let him
lift a hoe in his hand or follow the oxen behind the plough, j
But still he was useful for he watched the labour of others
and he stood by when the grain was weighed and measured.
So when he heard what Wang Lung wished him to do he
washed himself and put on his good blue cotton coat and
he went hither and thither to this village and that and he
looked at many maidens and at last he came back and he
said:

'Now would I liefer have to choose a wife for myself
than for your son. But if it were I and I young, there is a
maid three villages away, a good, buxom, careful maid with
no fault except a ready laugh, and her father is willing
and glad to be tied to your family by his daughter. And the
dowry is good for these times, and he has land. But I
said I could give no promise until you gave it.'

It seemed to Wang Lung then that this was good enough
and he was anxious to be done with it and so he gave
his promise and when the papers were come he set his
mark to them, and he was relieved and he said:

'Now there is but one more son and I am finished
with all this wedding and marrying and I am glad I am
so near my peace.'

And when it was done and the wedding-day set, he
rested and sat in the sun and slept even as his father had
done before him.

Then it seemed to Wang Lung that as Ching grew
feeble with age and since he himself grew heavy and
drowsy with his food and his age, and his third son was
yet too young for responsibility, that it would be well to
rent some of his farthest fields to others in the village.
This Wang Lung did, then, and many of the men in the
villages near by came to W 7 ang Lung to rent his land and
to become his tenants, and the rent Was decided upon,
half of the harvests to go to Wang Lung because he owned
I the land, and half to the one who hired because of his
i labour, and there were other things which each must furnish



242



besides : Wang Lung certain stores of manure and of bean-
cake and of sesame refuse from his oil mill after the sesame v
was ground; the tenant certain crops for the use of Wang
Lung's house.

And then, since there was not the need for his manage-
ment that there had been, Wang Lung went sometimes
into the town and slept in the court which he caused to be
prepared for him, but when day came he was back upon
his land, walking through the gate in the wall about the
town as soon as it was open after dawn came. And he
smelled the fresh smell of the fields and when he came to
his own land he rejoiced in it.

Then, as if the gods were kind for the once and had
prepared peace for his old age, his uncle's son, who grew
restless in the house now quiet and without women save for
the stout serving woman who was wife to one of the -
labourers, this uncle's son heard of a war to the north and
he said to Wang Lung:

'It is said there is a war to the north of us and I will
go and join it for something to do and to see. This I will
if you will give me silver to buy more clothes and my
bedding and a foreign fires tick to put over my shoulder.'

Then Wang Lung's heart leaped with pleasure but he
hid his pleasure artfully and he demurred in pretence and
he said:

'Now you are the only son of my uncle and after you
there are none to carry on his body and if you go to war
what will happen?'

But the man answered, laughing:

'Well, and T am no fool and I will not stand anywhere
that my life is in danger. If there is to be a battle I will
go away until it is over. I wish for a change and a little /



travel and to see foreign parts before I am too old to



So Wang Lung gave him the silver readily and this
time again the giving was not hard so that he poured
the money out into the man's hand he said to himself:

'Well, and if he likes it there is an end to this curse
in my house, for there is always a war somewhere in the



do it.'




nation/ And again he said to himself, 'Well, and he may
even be killed, if my good fortune holds, for sometimes in
wars there are those who die.'

He was in high good humour then, although he con-
cealed it, and he comforted his uncle's wife when she wept
a little to hear of her son's going, and he gave her more
opium and lit her pipe for her and he said:

'Doubtless he will rise to be a military official and
honour will come to us all through him.'

Then at last there was peace, for there were only the
two old sleeping ones in the house in the country besides
his own, and in the house in the town the hour drew near
for the birth of Wang Lung's grandson.

Now Wang Lung, as this hour drew near, stayed more
and more in the house in town and he walked about the
courts and. he could never have done with musing on what
had happened, and he could never have his fill of wonder
at this : that here in these courts where the great family of
Hwang had once lived now he lived with his wife and his
sons and their wives and now a child was to be born of a
third generation.

And his heart swelled within, him so that nothing was
too good for his money to buy and he bought lengths of
satin and of silk for them all, for it looked ill to see com-
mon, cotton robes upon the carved chairs and about the
carved tables of southern blackwood, and he bought lengths
of good blue and black cotton for the slaves so that not
one of them needed to wear a garment ragged. This he
did, and he was pleased when the friends that his eldest
son had found in the town came in to the courts and
proud that they should see all that was.

And Wang Lung took it into his heart to eat dainty
foods, and he himself, who once had been well satisfied
with good wheaten bread wrapped about a stick of garlic,
now that he slept late in the day and did not work with
his own hands on the land, was not easily pleased with this
dish and that, and he tasted winter bamboo and shrimps'
rose and southern fish and shellfish from the northern seas
and pigeons' eggs and all those things which rich men use
to force their lagging appetites. And his son's ate and Lotus



244



also, and Cuckoo, seeing all that had come about, laughed
and said:

'Well, and it is like the old days when I was in these
courts, only this body of mine is withered and dried now
and not fit even for an old lord.

Saying this, she glanced slyly at Wang Lung and laughed
again, and he pretended not to hear her lewdness, but he
was pleased, nevertheless, that she had compared him to
the Old Lord.

So with this idle and luxurious living and rising when
they would and sleeping when they would, he waited for
his grandson. Then one morning he heard the groans of
a woman and he went into the courts of his eldest son
and his son met him and said:

'The hour is come, but Cuckoo says it will be long,
for the woman is narrowly made and it is a hard birth.'

ScTWang Lung went back to his own court and he sat
down and listened to the cries, and for the first time in
many years he was frightened and felt the need of some
spirit's aid. He rose and went to the incense shop and he
bought incense and he went to the temple in the town
where the goddess of mercy dwells in her gilded alcove '
and he summoned an idling priest and gave him money
and bade him thrust the incense before the goddess saying :

'It Js ill for me, a man, to do it, but my first grandson
is about to be born and it is a heavy labour for the mother, !
who is a town woman and too narrowly made, and the f
mother of my son is dead, and fhere is no woman to thrust
in the incense.'

Then, as he watched the priest thrust it in the ashes
of the % urn before the goddess, he thought with sudden
horror, 'And what if it be not a grandson but a girl!' and
he called out hastily: t

'Well, and if it is a grandson I will pay for a new red\
robe for the goddess, but nothing will I do if it is a girl!'

He went out in agitation because he had not thought '
of this thing, that it might be not a grandson but a girl,
and he went and bought more incense, although the day
was hot and in the streets the dust was a span's depth,
and he went out in spite of this to the small country temple



where the two sat who watched over fields and land and
he thrust the incense in and lit it and he muttered to the
pair:

'Well now, and we have cared for you, my father and
I and my son, and now here comes the fruit of my son's
body, and if it is not a son there is nothing more for the
two of you.'

Then having done all he could, he went back to the
courts, very spent, and he sat down at his table and he
wished for a slave to bring him tea and for another to
bring him a towel dipped and wrung from steaming water
to wipe his face, but though he clapped his hands none
came. No one heeded him, and there was running to and
fro, but he dared to stop no one to ask what sort of a
child had been born or even if any had been born. He
sat there dusty and spent and no one spoke to him.

Then at last, when it seemed to him it must soon be
night, so long he had waited, Lotus came, in waddling upon
her small feet because of her great weight and leaning upon
Cuckoo, and she laughed and said Joudly:

£ Well, and there is a son in the house of your son, and
both mother and son are alive. I have seen the child and
it is fair and sound.'

Then Wang Lung laughed also and he rose and he
slapped his hands together and laughed again and he said :

'Well, and I have been sitting here like a man with
his own first son coming and not knowing what to do of
this and that and afraid of everything.'

And then when Lotus had gone on to her room and
he sat again he fell to musing and he thought to himself:

'Well, and I did not fear like this when that other one
bore her first, my son.' And he sat silent and musing and
he remembered within himself that day and how she had
gone alone into the small dark room and how alone she
had borne him sons and again sons and daughters and she
bore them silently, and how had come to the fields and
worked beside him again. And here was this one, now the
wife of his son, who cried like a child with her pains,
and who had all the slaves running in the house, and her
husband there by her door.

246



And he remembered as one remembers a dream long \
past how O-lan rested from her work a little while and
fed the~cfiild richly and the white rich milk ran out of her
breast and spilled upon the ground. And this seemed too
long past ever to have been. \

Then his son came in smiling and important and he
said loudly:

'Thej nan child is born, my father, and now we must
find a woman to nurse him with her breasts, for I will not
have my wife's beauty spoiled with the nursing and her
strength sapped with it. None of the women of position in J
the town do so.'

And Wang Lung said sadly, although why he was sad
he did not know:

'Well, and if it must be so, let it be so, if she cannot
nurse her own child.'



When the child was a month old W T ang Lung's son, its
father, gave the birth feast, and to it he invited guests from \/
the town and his wife's father and mother, and all the great
of the town. And he had dyed scarlet many hundreds of
hens' eggs, and these he gave to every guest and to anv
who sent guests, and there was feasting and joy through the
house, for the child was a goodly fat boy and he had
passed his tenth day and lived and this was a fear gone,
and they all rejoiced.

And when the birth feast was over Wang Lung's son
came to his father and he said:

'Now that there are the three generations in this house,
we should have the tablets of ancestors that great families,
have, and we should set the tablets up to be worshipped
at the feast days, for we are an established family now.'

This pleased Wang Lung greatly, and so ordered it
and so it was carried out, and there in the great hall the
row of tablets were set up, his grandfather's name on one
and then his father's, and the spaces left empty for Wang I
Lung's name and his son's when they should die. And \
Wang Lung's son bought an incense urn and set it before \
the tablets.

When this was finished Wang Lung remembered the



2 47



red robe he had promised the goddess of mercy and so he
went to the temple to give the money for it.

And then, on his way back, as if the gods cannot bear
to give freely and not hide sting somewhere in the gift, one
came running from the harvest fields to tell him that Ching
lay dying suddenly and had asked if Wang Lung would
come to see him die. Wang Lung, hearing the panting
runner, cried angrily:

'Now I suppose that accursed pair in the temple are
jealous because I gave a red robe to a town goddess and
I suppose they do not know they have no power over child-
birth and only over , land.'

And although his noon meal stood ready for him to eat
he would not take up his chopsticks, although Lotus called
loudly to him to wait until after the evening sun came; he
would not stay for her, and he went out. Then when Lotus
saw he did not heed her she sent a slave after him with an
umbrella of oiled paper, but so fast did Wang Lung run
that the stout maid had difficulty in holding the umbrella
over his head.

Wang Lung went at once to the room where Ching had
been laid and he called out loudly to any one:

'Now how did all this come about?'

The room was full of labourers crowding about and
they answered in confusion and haste:

'He would work himself at the threshing . . .* 'We told
him not at his age . . .' 'There was a labourer who is
newly hired . . .' 'He could not hold the flail rightly and
Ching would show him . . .' 'It is labour too hard for an
old man . . .'

Then Wang Lung called out in a terrible voice :

'Bring me this labourer.'

And they pushed the man in front before Wang Lung,
and he stood there trembling and his bare knees knocking
together, a great ruddy, coarse, country lad, with his teeth
sticking out in a shelf over his lower lip and round, dull
eyes like an ox's eyes. But Wang Lung' had no pity on
him. He slapped the lad on both his cheeks and he took
the umbrella from the slave's hand and he beat the lad
about the head, and none dared stop him lest his anger go

248



into his blood and at his age poison him. And the bump-
kin stood it humbly, blubbering a little and sucking his'
teeth.

Then Ching moaned from the bed where he lay and
Wang Lung threw down the umbrella and he cried out:

'Now this one will die while I am beating a fool!'

And he sat down beside Ching and took his hand and
held it, and it was as light and dry and small as a withered
oak leaf and it was not possible to believe that any blood
ran through it, so dry and light and hot it was. But Ching's
face, which was pale and yellow every day, was now dark
and spotted with his scanty blood, and his half-opened
eyes were filmed and blind and his breath came in gusts.
Wang Lung leaned down to him and said loudly in his
ear:

"Here am I and I will buy you a coffin second to my
father's only!'

But Ching's ears were filled with his blood, and if he
heard Wang Lung he made no sign, but he only lay there
panting and dying and so he died.

When he was dead Wang Lung leaned over him and
he wept as he had not wept when his own father died, and
he ordered a coffin of the best kind, and he hired priests
for the funeral and he walked behind wearing white mourn-
ing. He made his eldest son, even, wear white bands on
his ankles as though a relative had died, although his son
complained and said:

c He was only an upper servant, and it is not suitable so
to mourn for a servant.'

But Wang Lung compelled him for three days. And
if Wang Lung had had his way wholly, he would have
buried Ching inside the earthen wall where his father and
O-lan were buried. But his sons would not have it and they
complained and said:

'Shall our mother and grandfather lie with a servant?
And must we also in our time?'

Then Wang Lung, because he could not contend with
them and because at his age he would have peace in his
house, buried Ching at the entrance to the wall and he was
comforted with what he had done, and he said:

249



'Well, and it is meet, for has ever stood guardian to me
against evil.' And he directed his sons that when he himself
died he should lie nearest to Ching.

Then less than ever did Wang Lung go to see his lands,
because now Ching was gone it stabbed him to go alone
and he was weary of labour and his bones ached when
he walked over the rough fields alone. So he rented out
all his -land that he could and men took it eagerly, for
i it was known to be good land. But Wang Lung would
never talk of selling a foot of any piece, and he would
only rent it for an agreed price for a year at a time. Thus
i he felt it all his own and still in his hand.

And he appointed one of the labourers and his wife
and children to live in the country house and to care for
the two old opium dreamers. Then seeing his youngest
son's wistful eyes, he said:

'Well, and you may come with me into the town, and
I will take my fool with me too, and she can live in my
court where I am. It is too lonely for you now that Ching
is gone, and with him gone, I am not sure that they will
be kind to the poor fool seeing there will be none to tell
if she is beaten or ill fed. And there is no one now to
teach you concerning the land, now that Ching is gone.'

So Wang Lung took his youngest son and his fool with
him and thereafter he came scarcely at all for a long time
to the house on his land.



XXX

NOW TO WANG LUNG* IT SEEMED THERE WAS No-
thing left to be desired in his condition, and now he
could sit in his chair ifi the sun beside his fool and he could
smoke his water pipe and be at peace since his land was
tended and the money from it coming into his hand without
care from him.

And so it might have been if it had not been for that
eldest son of his who was never content with what was
going on well enough but must be looking aside for more.
So he came to his father saying:

2 5 o_



'There is this and that which we need in this house and
we must not think we can be a great family just because
we live in these inner courts. Now there is my younger
brother's wedding due in a bare six months and we have
not chairs enough to seat the guests and we have not bowls
enough nor tables enough nor anything enough in these
rooms. It is a shame, moreover, to ask guests to come
through the great gates and through all that common
swarm with their stinks and their noise, and with my brother
wed and his children and mine to come we need those
courts also.'

Then Wang Lung looked at his son standing there in
his handsome raiment and he shut his eyes and drew hard
on his pipe and he growled forth :

'Well, and what now and what again?'

The youjag man saw his father was weary of him but
he said stubbornly, and he«nade his voice a little louder:

'I say we should have the outer courts also and we ~\
should have what befits a family with so much money as
we have and good land as we have.'

Then Wang Lung muttered into his pipe:

'Well, and the land is mine and you have never put
your hand to it.'

'Well, and my father,' the young man cried out at this,
'it was you who would have me a scholar, and when I try
to be a fitting son to a man of land you scorn me and would
make a hind of me and my wife.' And the young man turn-
ed himself away stormily and made as though he would
knock his brains out against a twisted pine tree that stood
there in the court.

Wang Lung was frightened at this, lest the young man
do himself an injury, since he had been fiery always, and
so he* called out:

'Do as you like, do as you like — only do not trouble
me with it!'

Hearing this, the son went away quickly lest his father
change, and he went well pleased. As quickly as he was
able, then, he bought tables and chairs from Soochow,
carved and wrought, and he bought curtain of red silk to
hang in the doorways and he bought vases large and small



251



and he bought scrolls to hang on the wall and as many as
he could of beautiful women, and he bought curious rocks
to make rockeries in the courts such as he had seen in
southern parts, and thus he busied himself for many days.

With all this coming and going he had to pass many
times through the outer courts, even every day, and he
could not pass among the common people without sticking
his nose up and he could not bear them, so that the people
who lived there laughed at him after he had passed and
they said:

'He has forgotten the smell of the manure in the door-
yard of his father's farm!'

But still none dared to speak thus as he passed, for he
was a rich man's son. When the feast came when rents
are decided upon these common people found that the rent
for the rooms and the courts where they lived had been
greatly raised, because another would pay that much for
them, and they had to move away. Then they knew it was
Wang Lung's eldest son who had done this, although he
was clever and said nothing and did it all by letters to the
son of the old Lord Hwang in foreign parts, and this son
of the Old Lord cared for nothing except where and how
he could get the most money for the old house.

The common people had to move, then, and they moved
complaining and cursing because a rich man could do as
he would and they packed their tattered possessions and
went away swelling with anger and muttering that one day
they would come back even as the poor do come back
when the rich are too rich.

But all this Wang Lung did not hear, since he was in
the inner courts and seldom came forth, since he slept and
ate and took his ease as his age came on, and he left the
thing in the hands of his eldest son. And his son called
carpenters and clever masons and they repaired the rooms
and the moon gates between the courts that the common
people had ruined with their coarse ways of living, and he
built again the pools and he bought flecked and golden
fish to put in them. And after it was all finished and made
beautiful as far as he knew beauty, he planted lotus and
lilies in the pools, and the scarlet-berried bamboo of India



252



and everything he could remember he had seen in southern
parts. And his wife came out to see what he had done
and the two of them walked about through every court and
room and she saw this and that still lacking, and he listened I
with great heed to all she said, that he might do it. — *
Then people on the streets of the town heard of all
that Wang Lung's eldest son did, and they talked of what
was being done in the great house, now that a rich man
lived there again. And people who had said Wang The
Farmer now said Wang The Big Man or Wang The Rich
Man.

The money for all these doings had gone out of Wang
Lung's hand bit by bit, so that he scarcely knew when it
went, for the eldest son came and said:

'I need a hundred pieces of silver here'; or he said,
'There is a good gate which needs only an odd bit of
silver to mend it as good as new'; or he said, 'There is a
place where a long table should stand.'

And Wang Lung gave him the silver bit by bit, as he
sat smoking and resting in his court, for the silver came
in easily from the land at every harvest and whenever he
needed it, and so he gave it easily. He would not have
known how much he gave had not his second son come
into his court one morning when the sun was scarcely over
the wall and he said:

'My father, is there to be no end to all this pouring
out of money, and need we live in a palace? So much
money lent out at twenty per cent would have brought in
many pounds of silver, and what is the use of all these
pools and flowering trees that bear no fruit even, and all
these idle, blooming lilies?'

Wang Lung saw that these two brothers would quarrel
over this yet, and he said hastily, lest he never have any peace :

'Well, and it is all in honour of your wedding.'

Then the young man answered, smiling crookedly and
without any meaning of mirth:

'It is an odd thing for the wedding to cost ten times
as much as the bride. Here is our inheritance, that should
be divided between us when you are dead, being spent now
for nothing but the pride of my elder brother.'

253



And Wang Lung knew the determination of this second
son of his and he knew he would never have done with
him if talk began, so he said hastily:

'Well — well — I will have an end to it — I will speak to
your brother and I will shut my hand. It is enough. You
are right!'

The young man had brought out a paper on which
was written a list of all the moneys his brother had spent,
and Wang Lung saw the length of the list and he said
quickly:

'I have not eaten yet and at my age I am faint in the
morning until I eat. Another time for this.' And he turned
and went into his own room and so dismissed his second
son.

But he spoke that same evening to his eldest son, saying :

'Have done with all this painting and polishing. It is
enough. We are, after all, country folk.'

But the young man answered proudly:

'That we are not. Men in the town are beginning to
call \is the great family Wang. It is fitting that we live
somewhat suitably to that name, and if my brother cannot
see beyond the meaning of silver for its own sake, I and
my wife, we will uphold the honour of the name.'

Now Wang Lung had not known that men so called
his house, for as he grew older he went seldom even to
the tea-shops and no more to the grain markets since there
was his second son to do his business there for him, k but it
pleased him secretly and so he said:

'Well, even great families are from the land and rooted
in the land.'

But the young man answered smartly:

'Yes, but they do not stay there. They branch forth and
bear flowers and fruits.'

Wang Lung would not have his son answering him too.
easily and quickly like this, so he said:

'I have said what I have said. Have done with pouring
out silver. And roots, if they are to bear fruit, must be
kept well in the soil of the land.'

Then since evening came on, he wished his son would
go away out of this court and into his own. He wished

254



the young man to go away and leave him in peace in the
twilight and alone. But there was no peace for him with
this son of his. This son was willing to obey his father
now, for he was satisfied in the rooms and the courts, at
least for the time, and he had done what he would do;
but he began again:

'Well, let it be enough, but there is another thing.'

Then Wang Lung flung his pipe down upon the ground
and he shouted:

'Am I never to be in peace?'

And the young man went on stubbornly:

c It is not for myself or for my son. It is for my youngest
brother who is your own son. It is not fit that he grow
up so ignorant. He should be taught something.'

Wang Lung stared at this for it was a new thing. He
had long ago settled the life of his youngest son, what it
was to be, and he said now:

'There is no need for any more stomachfuls of characters
in this house. Two is enough, and he is to be on the land
when I am dead.'

'Yes, and for this he weeps in the night, and this is why
he is so pale and so reedy a lad,' answered the eldest son.
Tfow Wang Lung had never thought to ask his youngest
son what he wished to do with his life, since he had decided
one son must be on the land, and this that his eldest son^
had said struck him between the brows and he was silent.
He picked up his pipe from the ground slowly and pondered
about his third son. He was a lad not like either of his
brothers, a lad as silent as his mother, and because he was
silent none paid any attention to him.

c Have you heard him say this?' asked Wang Lung of
his eldest son, uncertainly.

'Ask him for yourself, my father,' replied the young man.

'Well, but one lad must be on the land,' said Wang
Lung suddenly in argument and his voice was very loud.

'But why, my father?' urged the young man. 'You
are a man who need not have any sons like serfs. It is not
fitting. People will say you have a mean heart. "There is
a man who makes his son into a hind while he lives like a
prince." So people will say.'

*55



Now the young man spoke cleverly, for he knew that
his father cared mightily what people said of him, and he
went on:

'We could call a tutor and teach him and we could
send him to a southern school and he could learn, and,
since there is me in your house to help you and my second
brother in his good trade, let the lad choose what he will.M

Then Wang Lung said at last:

'Send him here to me/

After a while the third son came and stood before his I
father and Wang Lung looked at him to see what he was.
And he saw a tall and slender lad, who was neither his I
father nor his mother, except that he had his mother's
gravity and silence. But there was more beauty in him I
than there had been in his mother, and for beauty alone
he had more of it than any of Wang Lung's children except J
the second girl who had gone to her husband's family and
belonged no more to the house of Wang. But across the
lad's forehead and 'almost a mar to his beauty were his
two black brows, too heavy and black forhis young, pale
face, and when he frowned, and he frowned easily, these
black brows met, heavy and straight, across his brow.

And Wang Lung stared at his son and after he had |
seen him well, he said:

'Your eldest brother says you wish to learn to read.'

And the boy said, scarcely stirring his lips:

'Aye.'

Wang Lung shook the ash from his pipe and pushed the
fresh tobacco in slowly with his thumb.

'Well, and I suppose that means you do not want to
work on the land and I shall not have a son on my own j
land, I with sons and to spare.'

This he said with bitterness, but the boy said nothing
He stood there straight and still in his long white robe of
summer linen, and at last Wang Lung was angry at his
silence and he shouted at him:

'Why do you not speak? Is it true you do not want
to be on the land?'

And again the boy answered only the one word:

256



'Aye.'

And Wang Lung looking at him said to himself at last
that these sons of his were too much for him in his old
age jind they were a care and burden to him and he did
not know what to do with them, and he shouted again,
feeling himself ill-used by these sons of his :

'What is__it_t£LJne- what you do? Get away from me!'

Then the boy went away swiftly and Wang Lung sat
alone and he said to himself that his two girls were better
after all than his sons, one, poor fool that she was, never
wanted anything more than a bit of any food and her
length of cloth to play with, and the other one married and
away from his house. And the twilight came down over
the court and shut him into it alone.

Nevertheless, as Wang Lung always did when his anger
passed, he let his sons have their way, and he called his
elder son and he said:

'Engage a tutor for the third one if he wills it, and let
him do as he likes, only I am not to be troubled about it.'

And he called his second son and said:

'Since I am not to have a son on the land it is your
duty to see to the rents and to the silver that comes in
from the land at each harvest. You can weigh and measure
and you shall be my steward.'

The second son was pleased enough for this meant the
money would pass through his hands at least, and he would
know what came in and he could complain to his father if
more than enough was spent in the house.

Now this second son of his seemed more strange to
Wang than any of his sons, for even at the wedding-day,
which came on, he was careful of the money spent on
meats and on wines and he divided the tables carefully,
keeping the best meats for his friends in the town who
knew the cost of the dishes, and for the tenants and the
country people who must be invited he spread tables in
the courts, and to these he gave only the second best in
meat and wine, since they daily ate coarse fare, and to
them a little better was very good.

And the second son watched the money and the gifts
that came in, and he gave to the slaves and servants the

257

5056, 17.



least that could be given them, so that Cuckoo sneered
when into her hand he put a paltry two pieces of silver
and she said in the hearing of many:

'Now a truly great family is not so careful of its silver
and one can see that this family does not rightly belong
in these courts.'

The eldest son heard this, and he was ashamed and
he was afraid of her tongue and he gave her more silver
secretly and he was angry with his second brother. Thus
there was trouble between them even on the very wedding-
day when the guests sat about the tables and when the
bride's chair was entering the courts.

And of his own friends the eldest son asked but a few
of the least considered to the feast, because he was ashamed
of his brother's parsimony and because the bride was but
a village maid. He stood aside scornfully, and he said:

'Well, and my brother has chosen an earthen pot when
he might, from my father's position, have had a cup of
jade.'

And he was scornful and nodded stiffly when the pair
came and bowed before him and his wife as their elder
brother and sister. And the wife of the eldest son was
correct and haughty and bowed only the least that could
be considered proper for her position.

Now of all of them who lived in these courts it seemed
there was none wholly at peace and comfortable there
except the small grandson who had been born to Wang
Lung. Even Wang Lung himself, waking within the shadows
of the great carved bed where he slept in his own room
that was next to the court where Lotus lived, even he woke
to dream sometimes that he was back in the simple, dark,
earth-walled house where a man could throw his cold tea
down where he would not splatter a piece of carven wood,
and where a step took him into his own fields.

As for Wang Lung's sons, there was continual unrest,
the eldest son lest not enough be spent and they be be-
littled in the eyes of men and lest the villagers come walking
through the great gate when a man from the town was
there to call, and so make them ashamed before him;

258



and the second son lest there was waste and money gone;
and the youngest son striving to make repair the years he
had lost as a farmer's son.

But there was one who ran staggering hither and yon
and content with his life and it was the son of the eldest
son. This small one never thought of any other place than
this great house and to him it was neither great nor small
but only his house, and here was his mother and here his
father and grandfather and all those who lived but to serve
him. And from this one did Wang Lung secure peace,
and he could never have enough of watching him and
laughing at him and picking him up when he fell. He
remembered also what his own father had done, and he
delighted to take a girdle and put it about the child and
walk, holding him thus from falling, and they went from
court to court, and the child pointed at the darting fish in
the pools and jabbered this and that and snatched the head
of a flower and was at his ease in the midst of everything,
and only thus did Wang Lung find peace.

Nor was there only this one. The wife of the eldest
son was faithful and she conceived and bore and conceived
and bore regularly and faithfully, and each child as it was
born had its slave. Thus Wang Lung each year saw more
children in the courts and more slaves, so that when one
said to him, 'There is to be another mouth again in the
eldest son's court,' he only laughed and said:

'Eh — eh — well, there is rice and enough for all since
we have the good land.'

And he was pleased when his second son's wife bore
also in her season, and she gave birth to a girl first as was
fitting and it was seemly out of respect to her sister in-law.
Wang Lung, then, in the space of five years had four
grandsons and three grand-daughters and the courts were
filled with their laughter and their weeping.

Now five years is nothing in a man's life except when
he is very young and very old, and if it gave to Wang
Lung these others, it took away also that old dreamer, his
uncle, whom he had almost forgotten except to see that he
and his old wife were fed and clothed and had what they
wished of opium.

259



On the winter of the fifth year it was very cold, more
cold than any winter for thirty years, so that for the first
time in Wang Lung's memory the moat froze about the
wall of the town and men could walk back and forth on
it. A continual icy wind blew also from the north-east
and there was nothing, no garment of goatskin or fur,
that could keep a man warm. In every room in the great
house they burned braziers of charcoal and still it was
cold enough to see a man's breath when he blew it out.

Now Wang Lung's uncle and his wife had long since
smoked all the flesh off their bones and they lay day in
and day out on their beds like two old dry sticks, and: there
was no warmth in them. And Wang Lung heard his uncle
could not sit up even any more in his bed and he spat
blood whenever he moved at all, and he went out to see,
and he saw there were not many hours left for the old
man.

Then Wang Lung bought two coffins of wood good
enough but not too good, and he had the coffins taken
into the room where his uncle lay that the old man might
see them and die in comfort, knowing there was a place
for his bones. And his uncle said, his voice a quavering
whisper:

'Well, and you are a son to me and more than that
wandering one of my own.'

And the old woman said, but she was still stouter than
the man:

Mf I die before that son comes home, promise me you
* will find a good maid for him, so that he may have sons
I for us yet.' And Wang Lung promised it.

What hour his uncle died Wang Lung did not know,
except that he lay dead one evening when the serving
woman went in to take a bowl of soup, and Wang Lung
buried him. on a bitter cold day when the wind blew the
snow over the land in clouds, and he put the coffin in the
family enclosure beside his father, only a little lower than
| his father's grave, but above the place where his own was
f to be.

\ Then Wang Lung caused mourning to be made for
I the whole family and they wore the sign of mourning for

260



a year, not because any truly mourned the passing of this
old man who had never been anything but a care to them,
but because it is fitting so to do in a great family when a
relative dies.

Then Wang Lung moved his uncle's wife into the town
where she would not be alone, and he gave her a room at
the end of a far court for her own, and he told Cuckoo
to supervise a slave in the care of her, and the old woman
sucked her opium pipe and lay on her bed in great con-
tent, sleeping day after day, and her coffin was beside her
where she could see it for her comfort.

And Wang Lung marvelled to think that once he had
feared for a great fat blowsy country woman, idle and
loud, she who lay there now, shrivelled and yellow and
silent, as shrivelled and yellow as the Old Mistress had
been in the fallen House of Hwang.



XXXI

NOW ALL HIS LIFE LONG WANG LUNG HAD HEARD OF
war here and there but he had never seen the thine come
near except the once that he wintered in the southern city
when he was young. It had never come nearer to him than
that, although he had often heard men say from the time
he was a child, 'There is a war to the west this year,' or
they said, 'War is to the east or the north-east.'

And to him war was a thing like earth and sky and
water and why it was no one knew but only that it was.
Now and again he heard men say, 'We will go to the
wars.' This they said when they were about to starve and
would rather be soldiers than beggars; and sometimes men
said it when they were restless at home, ad the son of his
uncle had said it, but however this was, the war was always
away and in a distant place. Then suddenly like a reasonless
wind out of heaven the thing came near.

Wang Lung heard of it first from his second son who
came home from the market one day for his noon rice
and he said to his father:

'The price of grain has risen suddenly, for the war is

261



to the south of us now and nearer every day, and we
must hold our stores of grain until later for the price will
go higher and higher as the armies come nearer to us and
we can sell for a good price.'

Wang Lung listened to this as he ate and he said:

'Well, and it is a curious thing and I shall be glad to
see a war for what it is, for I have heard of it all my life
and never seen it.'

To himself then he remembered that once he had been
afraid because he would have been seized against his will,
but now he was too old for use and besides he was rich
and the rich need not fear anything. So he paid no great
heed to the matter beyond this and he was hot moved
by more than a little curiosity and he said to his second son :

'Do as you think well with the grain. It is in your
hands/

And in the days to come he played with his grand-
children when he was in the mood, and he slept and ate
and smoked and sometimes he went to see his poor fool
who sat in a far corner of his court.

Then sweeping out of the north-west like a swarm of
locusts there came one day in early summer a horde of
men. Wang Lung's small grandson stood at the gate with
a manservant to see what passed one fine sunny morning
in early spring and when he saw the long ranks of grey-
coated men, he ran back to his grandfather and he cried out :

'See what comes, Old One!'

Then Wang Lung went back to the gate with him to
humour him, and there the men were filling the street,
filling the town, and Wang Lung felt as though air and
sunlight had been suddenly cut off because of the numbers
of grey men tramping heavily and in unison through the
town. Then Wang Lung looked at them closely and he
saw that every man held an implement of some sort with
a knife sticking out of the end, and the face of every man
was wild and fierce and coarse; even though some were
only lads, they^were so. And Wang Lung drew the child
to him hastily when he saw their faces and he murmured :

'Let us go and lock the gate. They are not good men
to see, my little heart.'

262



But suddenly, before he could turn, one saw him from
among the men and shouted out at him:

'Ho there, my old father's nephew!'

Wang Lung looked up at this call, and he saw the son
of his uncle, and he was clad like the others and* dusty
and grey, but his face was wilder and more fierce than
any. And he laughed harshly and called out to his fel-
lows :

'Here we may stop, my comrades, for this is a rich
man and my relative!'

Before Wang Lung could move in his horror, the horde
was pouring past him into his own gates and he was power-
less in their midst. Into his courts they poured like evil
filthy water, filling every corner and crack, and they laid
themselves down on the floors and they dipped with their
hands in the pools and drank, and they clattered their
knives down upon carven tables and they spat where they
would and shouted at each other.

Then Wang Lung, in despair over what had happened,
ran back with the child to find his eldest son. He went
into his son's courts and there his son sat reading a book
and he rose when his father entered, and when he heard
what Wang Lung gasped forth, he began to groan and
he went out.

But when he saw his cousin he did not know whether
to curse him or to be courteous to him. But he looked
and he groaned forth to his father who was behind him-

'Every man with a knife!'

So he was courteous then and he said:

'Well, and my cousin, welcome to your home again.'

And the cousin grinned widely and said:

'I have brought a few guests.'

'They are welcome, being yours,' said Wang Lung's
eldest son, 'and we will prepare a meal so that they may
eat before they go on their way.'

Then the cousin said, still grinning:

'Do, but make no haste afterwards, for we will rest a
handful of days or a moon or a year or two, for we are to
be quartered on the town until the war calls.'

Now when Wang Lung and his son heard this they

263



could scarcely conceal their dismay, but still it must be
concealed because of the knives flashing everywhere through
the courts, so they smiled what poor smiles t'hey could
muster and they said:

'We are fortunate — we are fortunate '

And the eldest son pretended he must go to prepare,
and he took his father's hand and the two of them rushed
into the inner court and the eldest son barred the door,
and then the two, father and son, stared at each other in
consternation, and neither knew what to do.

Then the second son came running and he beat upon
the door and when they let him in he fell in and scarcely
could save himself in his haste and he panted forth:

'There are soldiers everywhere in every house — even
in the houses of the poor — and I came running to say you
must not protest, for to-day a clerk in my shop, and I knew
him well — he stood beside me every day at the counter —
and he heard and went to his house and there were soldiers
in the very room where his wife lay ill, and he protested
and they ran a knife through him as though he were made
of lard — as smoothly as that — and it came through him
clean. to the other side! Whatever they wish we must give,
but let'us only pray that the war move on to other parts
before long!'

Then the three of them looked at each other heavily,
and thought of their women and of these lusty, hungry
men. And the eldest son thought of his goodly, proper
wife, and he said :

c We must put the women together in the innermost
court and we must watch there day and night and keep
the gates barred and the back gate of peace ready to be
loosed and opened/

Thus they did. They took the women and the children
and they put them all into the inner court where Lotus
had lived alone with Cuckoo and her maids, and there in
discomfort and crowding they lived. The eldest son and
Wang Lung watched the gate day and night and the
second son came when he could, and they watched as
carefully by night as by day.

But there was that one, the cousin, and because he was

264



a relative none could lawfully keep him out and he beat
on the gate and he would come in and he walked about
at will, carrying his knife shining and glittering and open
in his hand. The eldest son followed him about, his face
full of bitterness, but still not daring to say anything, for
there was the knife open and glittering, and the cousin
looked at this and that and appraised each woman.

He looked at the wife of the eldest son and he laughed
his hoarse laugh and he said:

c Well, and it is a proper dainty bit you have, my cousin,
a town lady and her feet as small as lotus buds!' And to
the wife of the second son he said, 'Well, here is a good
stout red radish from the country — a piece of sturdy red
meat!'

This he said because the woman was fat and ruddy and
thick in the bone, but still not uncomely. And whereas the
wife of the eldest son shrank away when he looked at her
and hid her face behind her sleeve, this one laughed out,
good humoured and robust as she was, and she answered
pertly :

'Well, and some men like a taste of hot radish, or a
bite of red meat.'

And the cousin answered back, promptly:

'That do I!' and he made as if to seize her hand.

All this time the eldest son was in an agony of shame !
at this byplay between man and woman who ought not j
even to speak to each other, and he glanced at his wife
because he was ashamed of his cousin and of his sister-in-
law before her who had been more gently bred than he,
and his cousin saw his timidity before his wife and said
w T ith malice:

'Well, and I had rather eat red meat any day than a
slice of cold and tasteless fish like this other one!'

At this the wife of the eldest son rose in dignity and
withdrew herself into an inner room. Then the cousin
laughed coarsely and he said to Lotus, who sat there
smoking her water pipe:

'These town women are too finicking, are they not,
Old Mistress?' Then he looked at Lotus attentively and
he said: 'Well, and Old Mistress indeed, and if I did not

265



know my cousin Wang Lung were rich I should know
by looking at you, such a mountain of flesh you have
become, and well you have eaten and how richly! It is
only rich men's wives who can look like you!'

Now Lotus was mightily pleased that he called her Old
Mistress, because it is a title that only the ladies of great
families may have, and she laughed deep and gurgling,
out of her fat throat and she blew the ash out of her pipe
and handed the pipe to a slave to fill again, and she said
turning to Cuckoo:

'Well, this coarse fellow has a turn for a joke!'

And as she said this she looked at the cousin out of
eyes coquettishly, although such glances, now that her
eyes were no longer large and apricot-shaped in her great
cheeks, were less coy than they once were, and seeing the
look she gave him, the cousin laughed in uproar and cried
out:

'Well, and it is an old bitch, still!' and he laughed again
loudly.

And all this time the eldest son stood there in anger
and in silence.

Then when the cousin had seen everything he went to
see his mother and Wang Lung went with him to show
where she was. There she lay on her bed, sleeping so that
her son could hardly wake her, but wake her he did, clap-
ping the thick end of his gun upon the tiles of the floor at
her bed's head. Then she woke and stared at him out of
a dream, and he said impatiently:

'Well, and here is your son and yet you sleep on!'

She raised herself from her bed and stared at him again
and she said wondering:

'My son — it is my son ' and she looked at him for

a long time and at last as though she did not know what
else to do she proffered him her opium pipe, as if she
could think of no greater good than this, and she said to
the slave that tended her. 'Prepare some for him.'

And he stared back at her and he said:

'No, I will not have it.'

Wang Lung stood there beside the bed and he was
suddenly afraid lest this man should turn on him and say:

266



'What have you done to my mother that she is sere
and yellow like this and all her good flesh gone?'
So Wang said hastily himself:

'I wish she were content with less, for it runs into a
handful of silver a day for her opium, but at her age we
I do not dare to cross her and she wants it all.' And he
sighed as he spoke, and he glanced secretly at his uncle's
son, but the man said nothing, only stared to see what his
mother had become, and when she fell back and into her
sleep again, he rose and clattered forth, using his gun as a
stick in his hand.

None of the horde of idle men in the outer courts did
Wang Lung and his family hate and fear as they did this
i cousin of theirs; this, although the men tore at the trees and
the flowering shrubs of plum and almond and broke them
as they would, and though they crushed the delicate carvings
of chairs with their great leathern boots, and though they
sullied with their private filth the pools where the flecked
and golden fish swam, so that the fish died and floated on
the water and rotted there, with their white bellies upturned.

For the cousin ran in and out as he would and he cast
eyes at the slaves, and Wang Lung and his sons looked at
each other out of their eyes haggard and sunken because
they dared not sleep. Then Cuckoo saw it and she said:

'Now there is only one thing to do, he must be given
a slave for his pleasure while he is here, or else he will be
taking where he should not.'

And Wang Lung seized eagerly on what she said be-
cause it seemed to him he could not endure his life .any
more with all the trouble there was in his house, and so
he said:

£ It is a good thought.'

And he bade Cuckoo go and ask the cousin what slave
he would have since he had seen them all.

So Cuckoo did, then, and she came back and she said:

'He says he will have the little pale one who sleeps on
the bed of the mistress.'

Now this pale slave was called Pear Blossom and the
one Wang Lung had bought in a famine year when she
was small and piteous and half-starved, and because she

267



was delicate always they had petted her and allowed her
only to help Cuckoo and to do the lesser things about I
Lotus, filling her pipe and pouring her tea, and it was thus I
the cousin had seen her.

Now when Pear Blossom heard this she cried out as
she poured the tea for Lotus, for Cuckoo said it all out
before them in the inner court where they sat, and she
dropped the pot and it broke into pieces on the tiles and
the tea all streamed out, but the maid did not see what
she had done. She only threw herself down before Lotus
and she knocked her head on the tiles and she moaned
forth:

'Oh, my mistress, not I — not I — I am afraid of him for
my life '

And Lotus was displeased with her and she answered
pettishly:

'Now he is only a man and a man is no more than a
man with a maid and they are all alike, and what is this
ado?' And he turned to Cuckoo and said, 'Take this slave
and give her to him.'

Then the young maid put her hands together piteously
and cried as though she would die of weeping and fear
and her little body was all trembling with her fear, and
she looked from this face to that, beseeching with her
weeping.

Now the sons of Wang Lung could not speak against
their father's wife, nor could their wives speak if they did
not, nor could the youngest son, but he stood there staring
at her, his hands clenched on his bosom and his brows
drawn down over his eyes, straight and black. But he did
not speak. The children and the slaves looked and were
silent, and there was only the sound of this dreadful,
frightened weeping of the young girl.

But Wang Lung was made uncomfortable by it, and
he looked at the young girl doubtfully, not caring to anger
Lotus but still moved, because he had always a soft heart.
Then the maid saw his heart in his face and she ran and
held his feet with her hands and she bent her head down
to his feet and wept on in great sobs. And he looked
down at her and saw how small her shoulders were and



268



how they shook and he remembered the great, coarse, wild
body of his cousin, now long past his youth, and a distaste
for the thing seized him and he said to Cuckoo, his voice

' Well now, it is ill to force the young maid like this.'
These words he said mildly enough, but Lotus cried

out sharply: .

'She is to do as she is told, and I say it is foolish, all this
weeping over a small thing that must happen soon or late
with all women.'

But Wang Lung was indulgent and he said to Lotus :

'Let us see first what else can be done, and let me buy
for you another slave if you will, or what you will, but let
me see what can be done.'

Then Lotus, who had long been minded for a toreign
clock and a new ruby ring, was suddenly silent and Wang
Lung said to Cuckoo : .

'Go and tell my cousin the girl has a vile and incur-
able disease, but if he will have her with that, then well
enough and she shall come to him, but if he fears it as
we all do, then tell him we have another and a sound ,

OI1 And he cast his eyes over the slaves who stood about
and they turned away their faces and giggled and made as
if they were ashamed, all except one stout wench, who was
already twenty or so, and she said with her face red and

k " Well! 'and I have heard enough of this thing and I
have a mind to try it, if he will have me, and he is not so
hideous a man as some.'

Then Wang Lung answered in relief:

'Well, go then!'

And Cuckoo said: •
'Follow close behind me, for it will happen I know,
that he will seize the fruit nearest to him.' And they

went out. , c , i

But the little maid still clung to Wang Lung s feet, only
now she ceased her weeping and lay listening to what took
place. And Lotus was still angry with her, and she rose
and went into her room without a word. Then Wang Lung

269



raised the maid gently and she stood before him, drooping
and pale, and he saw that she had a little soft, oval face,
egg-shaped, exceedingly delicate and pale, and a little pale
red mouth. And he said kindly:

'Now keep away from your mistress for a day or two,
my child, until she is past her anger, and when that other
one comes in, hide, lest he desire you again.'

And she lifted her eyes and looked at him full and
passionately, and she passed him, silent as a shadow, and -
was gone.

The cousin lived there for a moon and a half and he
had the wench when he would and she conceived by him
and boasted in the courts of it. Then suddenly the war
called and the horde went away quickly as chaff caught
and driven by the wind, and there was nothing left except
the filth and destruction they had wrought. And Wang
Lung's cousin girded his knife to his waist and he stood
before them with his gun over his shoulder and he said
mockingly :

'Well, and if I come not back to you I have left you
my second self and a grandson for my mother, and it is
not every man who can leave a son where he stops for a
moon or two, and it is one of the benefits of the soldier's
life — his seed springs up behind him and others must
tend it!'

And laughing at them all, he went his way with the
others.

XXXII

WHEN THE SOLDIERS WERE GONE WANG LUNG AND
his two elder sons for once agreed, and it was that all trace
of what had just passed must be wiped away, and they
called in carpenters and masons again, and the men servants
cleaned the courts, and the carpenters mended cunningly
the broken carvings and tables, and the pools were emptied
of their filth and clean fresh water was put in, and again
the elder son bought flecked and golden fish and he planted
once more the flowering trees and he trimmed the broken



270



branches of the trees that were left. And within a year !
the place was fresh and flowering again and each son had
moved again into his own court and there was order once
more everywhere.

The slave who had conceived by the son of Wang
Lung's uncle he commanded to wait upon his uncle's wife
as long as she lived, which could not be long now, and to
put her into the coffin when she died. And it was a matter
for joy to Wang Lung that this slave gave birth only to a
girl, for if it had been a boy she would have been proud and
have claimed a place in the family, but being a girl it was j
only slave bearing slave, and she was no more than before.

Nevertheless, Wang Lung was just to her as to all, and
he said to her that she might have the old woman's room
for her own if she liked when the old one was dead, and
she could have the bed also, and one room and one bed
would not be missed from the sixty rooms in the house.
And he gave the slave a little silver, and the woman was
content enough except for one thing, and this she told to
Wang Lung when he gave her the silver.

'Hold the silver as dowry for me, my master,' she said,
'and if it is not a trouble to you, wed me to a farmer or
to a good poor man. It will be merit to you, and having
lived with a man, it is hardship to me to go back to my
bed alone.'

Then Wang Lung promised easily, and when he pro-
mised he was struck with a thought and it was this. Here
was he promising a woman to a poor man, and once he
had been a poor man come into these courts for his woman.
And he had not for half a lifetime thought of O-lan, and
now he thought of her with sadness that was not sorrow
but only heaviness of memory and things long gone, so
far distant was he from her now. And he said heavily:

'When the old opium dreamer dies, I will find a man
for you, then, and it cannot be long.'

And Wang Lung did as he said. The woman came to
him one morning and said:

'Now redeem your promise, my master, for the old
one died in the early morning without waking at all, and
I have put her in her coffin.'



271



And Wang Lung thought what man he knew now on
his land and he remembered the blubbering lad who had
caused Ching's death, and the one whose teeth were a shelf
over his lower lip, and he said:

'Well, and he did not mean the thing he did, and he is as
good as any and the only one I can think of now.'

So he sent for the lad and he came, and he was a man
grown now, but still he was rude and still his teeth were
as they were. And it was Wang Lung's whim to sit on the
raised dais in the great hall and to call the two before him
and he said slowly, that he might taste the whole flavour
of the strange moment:

'Here, fellow, is this woman, and she is yourifif you
will have her, and none has known her except the son of
my own uncle.'

And the man took her gratefully, for she was a stout
wench and good-natured, and he was a man too poor to
wed except to such an one.

And Wang Lung came down off the dais and it seemed
to him that now his life was rounded off and he had done
all that he said he would in his life and more than he
could ever have dreamed he could, and he did not know
himself how it had all come about. Only now it seemed
to him that peace could truly come to him and he could
sleep in the sun. It was time for it, also, for he was close
to sixty-five years of his age and his grandsons were like
young bamboos about him, three the sons of his eldest son,
and the eldest of these nearly ten years old, and two the
sons of his second son. Well, and there was the third son
to wed one day soon, and with that over there was thing
left to trouble him in his life, and he could be at peace.

But there was no peace. It seemed as though the coming
of the soldiers had been like the coming of a swarm of
wild bees that leave behind them stings wherever they can.
The wife of the eldest son and the wife of the second son
who had been courteous enough to each other until they
lived in one court together, now had learned to hate each
other with a great hatred. It was born in a hundred small
quarrels, the quarrels of women whose children must live
and play together and fight each other like cats and dogs.



272



Each mother flew to the defence of her child, and cuffed
the other's children heartly but spared her own, and her
own had always the right in any quarrel, and so the two
women were hostile.

And then on that day when the cousin had commended
the country wife and laughed at the city wife, that had
passed which could not be forgiven. The wife of the elder
son lifted her head haughtily when she passed her sister-
in-law and she said aloud one day to her husband as she
passed:

'It Js a heavy thing to have a woman bold and ill-bred
in the family, so that a man may call her red meat and
she laughs in his face.'

And the second son's wife did not wait but she an-
swered back loudly:

'Now my sister-in-law is jealous because a man called
her only a piece of cold fish!'

And so the two fell to angry looks and hatred, although
the elder, being proud of her correctness, would deal only
in silent scorn, careful to ignore the other's presence. But
when her children would go out of their own court she
called out:

C I would have you stay away from ill-bred children!'

This she called out in the presence of her sister-in-law
who stood within sight of the next court, and that one
would call out to her own children:

'Do not play with snakes or you will be bitten!'

So the two women hated each other increasingly, and
the thing was the more bitter because the two brothers did
not love each other well, the elder always being fearful lest
his birth and his family seem lowly in the eyes of his wife
who was town bred and better born than he, and the
younger fearful lest his brother's desire for expenditure
and place lead them into wasting their heritage before it
was divided. Moreover, it was a shame to the elder brother
that the second brother knew all the money their father
had and what was spent, for the money passed through
his hands, so that although Wang Lung received and
dispensed all the moneys from his lands, still the second
brother knew what it was and the elder did not, but must

2 73



5056, 18.



go and ask his father for this and that like a child. So when
the two wives hated each other, their hatred spread to the
men also and the courts of the two were full of anger ,
and Wang Lung groaned because there was no peace in
his house.

Wang Lung had also his own secret trouble with Lotus
since the day when he had protected her slave from the
son of his uncle. Ever since that day the young maid had
been in disfavour with Lotus, and although the girl waited
on her silently and slavishly, and stood by her side all day
filling her pipe and fetching this and that, and rising in
the night at her complaint that she was sleepless and rub-
bing her legs and her body to soothe her, still Lotus was
not satisfied.

And she was jealous of the maid and she sent her from
the room when Wang Lung came in and she accused Wang
Lung that he looked at the maid. Now Wang Lung had
not thought of the girl except as a poor small child who
was frightened and he cared as he might care for his poor
fool and no more. But when Lotus accused him he took
thought to look and he saw it was true that the girl was
very pretty and pale as a pear blossom, and seeing this,
something stirred in his old blood that had been quiet
these ten years and more.

So while he laughed at Lotus saying: 'What — are_y.au
thinking I am still a-lust, when I do not come into your
room thrice a year?' yet he looked sidelong at the girl
and he was stirred.

Now Lotus, for all she was ignorant in all ways except
the one, was learned in the way of men with women and
she knew that men when they are old will wake once again
to a brief youth, and so she was angry with the maid and
she talked of selling her to the tea-house. But still Lotus
loved her comfort and Cuckoo grew old and lazy and the
maid was quick and used about the person of Lotus and
saw what her mistress needed before she knew it herself,
and so Lotus was loath to part with her and yet she would
part with her, and in this unaccustomed conflict Lotus was
the more angry because of her discomfort and she was



274



more hard than usual to live with. Wang Lung stayed
away from her court for many days at a time because her
temper was too ill to enjoy. He said to himself that he
would wait, thinking it would pass, but meanwhile he
thought of the pretty pale young maid more than he him-
self would believe he did. ~

Then, as though there was not enough trouble with the
women of his house all awry, there was Wang Lung's
youngest son. Now his youngest son had been so quiet
a lad, so bent on his belated books, that none thought of him
except as a reedy slender youth with books always under
his arm and an old tutor following him about like a dog.

But the lad had lived among the soldiers when they
were there and he had listened to their tales of war and
plunder and battle, and he listened rapt to it all, saying
nothing. Then he begged novels of his old tutor, stories
of the wars of the three kingdoms and of the bandits who
lived in ancient times about the Swei Lake, and his head
was full of dreams.

So now he went to his father and he. said:

'I know what I will do. I will be a soldier and I will
go forth to wars.'

When Wang Lung heard this, he thought in great
dismay that it was the worst thing that could yet happen
to him and he cried out with a great voice :

'Now what madness is this, and am I never to have
any peace with my sons!' And he argued with the lad
and he tried to be gentle and kindly when he saw the lad's
black brows gather into a line and he said. { My son, it is
said from ancient times that men do not take good iron to
make a nail nor a good man to make a soldier, and you
are my little son, my best little youngest son, and how
shall I sleep at night and you wandering over the earth
here and there in a war?'

But the boy was determined and he looked at his father
and drew down his black brows and he said onlv:

1 will go.'

Then Wang Lung coaxed him and said:
'Now you may go to any school you like and I will
send you to the great schools of the south or even to a

2 75



foreign school to learn curious things, and you shall go
anywhere you like for study if you will not be a soldier.
It is a disgrace to a man like me, a man of silver and of
land, to have a son who is a soldier.' And when the lad
was still silent, he coaxed again, and he said, 'Tell your old
father why you want to be a soldier?'

And the lad said suddenly, and his eyes were alight
under his 'brows:

'There is to be a war such as we have not heard of —
there is to be a revolution and righting and war such as
never was, and our land is to be free!'

Wang Lung listened to this in the greatest astonishment
he had yet had from his three sons.

/Now what all this stuff is, I do not know,' he said
wondering. 'Our land is free already — all our good land
is free. I rent it to whom I will and it brings me silver
and good grains and you eat and are clothed and are fed
by it, and I do not know what freedom you desire more
than you have.'

But the boy only muttered bitterly:

'You do not understand — you are too old — you under-
stand nothing.'

And Wang Lung pondered and he looked at this son
of his and he saw the suffering young face, and he thought
to himself:

'Now I have given this son everything, even his life.
He has everything from me. I have let him leave the land,
even so that I have not a son after me to see to the land,
and I have let him read and write although there is no
need for it in my family with two already.' And he thought
and he said to himself further, still staring at the lad,
'Everything this son has from me.'

Then he looked closely at his son and he saw that he
was tall as a man already, though still reedy with youth,
and he said, doubtfully, muttering and half-aloud, for he
saw no sign of lust in the boy :

'Well, it may be he needs one thing more.' And he
said aloud then and slowly, 'Well, and we will wed you
soon, my son.'

But the boy flashed a look of fire at his father from

276



under his heavy gathered brows and he said scornfully:

'Then I will run away indeed, for to me. a woman is
not answer "to "everything as it is to my elder brother!'

Wang Lung saw at once that he was wrong and so he
said hastily to excuse himself:

'No — no — we will not wed you — but I mean, if there
is a slave you desire '

And the boy answered with lofty looks and with dignity,
folding his arms on his breast:

'I am not the ordinary young man. I have my dreams.
I wish for glory. There are women everywhere.' And
then as though he remembered something he had forgotten,
he suddenly broke from his dignity and his arms dropped
and he said in his usual voice, 'Besides, there never were
an uglier set of slaves than we have. If I cared— but I do
not — well, there is not a beauty in the courts except per-
haps the little pale maid who wait§ on the one in the inner
courts.'

Then Wang knew he spoke of Pear Blossom and he
was smitten with a strange jealousy. He suddenly felt
himself older than he was — -a man old and too thick of
girth and with whitening hair, and he saw his son a man
slim and young, and it was, in for this moment, father and
son, but two men, one old and one young, and Wang
Lung said angrily:

'Now keep off the slaves — I will not have the rotten
ways of young lords in my house. We are good stout
country folk and people with decent ways, and none of
this in my house!'

Then the boy opened his eyes and lifted his black brows
and shrugged his shoulders and he said to his father:

'You spoke of it first!' and then he turned away and
went out.

Then Wang Lung sat there alone in his room by his table
and he felt dreary and alone, and he muttered to himself :

'Well, and I have no peace anywhere in my house.'

He was confused with many angers, but, although he
could not understand why, this anger stood forth most
clearly; his son had looked on a little pale young maid in
the house and had found her fair.



2 77



XXXIII



WANG LUNG COULD NOT CEASE FROM HIS THOUGHT
of what his youngest son had said of Pear Blossom, and he
watched the maid incessantly as she came and went and
without his knowing it the thought of her filled his mind
and he doted on her. But he said nothing to any one.

One night in the early summer of that year, at the time
when the night air is thick and soft with the mists of
warmth and fragrance, he sat in his own court alone under
a flowering cassia tree and the sweet heavy scent of the
cassia flowers filled his nostrils and he sat there and his
blood ran full and hot like the blood of a young man.
Through the day he had felt his blood so and he had
been of half a mind to walk out on his land and feel the
good earth under his feet and take off" his shoes and his
stockings and feel it on his skin.
f This he would have done but he was ashamed lest men
\ see him, who was no longer held a farmer within the
.gates of the town, but a landowner and a rich man. So
he wandered restlessly about the courts and he stayed away
altogether from the court where Lotus sat in the shade and
smoked her water pipe, because well she knew when a man
was restless and she had sharp eyes to see what was amiss.
He went alone, then, and he had no mind to see either of
his two quarrelling daughters-in-law, nor even his grand-
children, in whom was his frequent delight.

So the day had passed very long and lonely and his
blood was full and coursing under his skin. He could not
forget his youngest son, how he had looked standing tall
and straight and his black brows drawn together in the
gravity of his youth, and he could not forget the maid.
And to himself he said :

'I suppose they are of an age — the boy must be well
on eighteen and she not over eighteen.'

Then he remembered that he himself would before many
years be seventy and he was shamed of his coursing blood,
and he thought:

'It would be a good thing to give the maid to the lad,'

2? 8



and this he said to himself again and again, and every
time he said it the thing stabbled like a thrust on flesh
already sore, and he could not but stab and yet he could
not but feel the pain.

And so the day passed very long and lonely for him.

When night came he was still alone and he sat in his
court alone and there was not one in all his house to
whom he could go as friend. And the night air was
thick and soft and hot with the smell of the flowers of the
cassia tree.

And as he sat there in the darkness under the tree one
passed beside where he was sitting near the gate of his
court where the tree stood, and he looked quickly and
it was Pear Blossom.

Tear Blossom!' he called, and his voice came in a
whisper.

She stopped suddenly, her head bent in listening.
Then he called again and his voice would scarcely come
from his throat:

'Come here to me!'

Then hearing him she crept fearfully through the gate
and stood before him and he could scarcely see her standing
there in the blackness, but he could feel her there and he
put out his hand and laid hold of her little coat and he said,
half choking:

'Child !'

There he stopped with the word. He said to himself
that he was an old man and it was a disgraceful thing for
a man with grandsons and grand-daughters nearer to this
child's age than he was, and he fingered her little coat.

Then she, waiting, caught from him the heat of his
blood and she bent over and slipped, like a flower crumpling
upon its stalk, to the ground, and she clasped his feet and
lay there. And he said slowly:

'Child — I am an old man — a very old man '

And she said, and her voice came out of the darkness
like the very breath of the cassia tree :

'I like old men — I like old men — they are so kind — - — '

He said again,' tenderly, stooping to her a little:

'A little maid like you should have a tall straight youth

279



— a little maid like you!' And in his heart he added, 'Like

my son ' but aloud he could not say it, because he

might put the thought into her mind, and he could not
bear it.

But she said:

'Young men are not kind — they are only fierce.'

And hearing her small childish voice quavering up from
about his feet his heart welled up in a great wave of love
for this maid, and he took her and raised her gently, and
then he led her into his own courts.

When it was done, this love of his age astonished him
more than of any his lusts before, for with all his love for
Pear Blossom he did not seize upon her as he had seized
upon the others whom he had known.

No, he held her gently and he was satisfied to feel her
light youth against his heavy old flesh, and he was satisfied
merely with the sight of her in the day and with the touch
of her fluttering coat against his hand and with the quiet
resting of her body near him in the night. And he wondered
at the love of old age, which is so fond and so easily
satisfied.

As for her, she was a passionless maid and she clung
to him as to a father, and to him she was indeed more
than half child and scarcely woman.

Now the thing that Wang Lung had done did not
quickly come out, for he said nothing at all, and why
should he, being master in his own house?

But the eye of Cuckoo marked it first and she saw the
maid slipping at dawn out of his court and she laid hold
of the girl and laughed, and her old hawk's eyes glittered.

'W r ell!' she said. 'And so it is the Old Lord over again!'

And Wang Lung in his room, hearing her, girded his
robe about him quickly and he came out and smiled sheep-
ishly and half proudly and he said muttering:

'Well, and I said she had better take a young lad and
she would have the old one!'

'It will be a pretty thing to tell the mistress,' Cuckoo
said then, and her eyes sparkled with malice.

'I do not know myself how the thing happened,' an-
swered Wang Lung slowly. 'I had not meant to add another

280



woman to my courts, and the thing came about of itself.'
Then when Cuckoo said, 'Well, and the mistress must be
told,' Wang Lung, fearing the anger of Lotus more than
anything begged Cuckoo and he said again, 'Do you tell
her, if you will, and if you can manage it without anger
to my face I will give you a handful of money for it.'

So Cuckoo, still laughing and shaking her head, promised,
and Wang Lung went back to his court and he would
not come forth for a while until Cuckoo came back and
said:

'Well, and the thing is told, and she was angry enough
until I reminded her she wanted and has wanted this long
time the foreign clock you promised her, and she will have
a ruby ring for her hand and a pair so that there will be
one on each hand, and she will have other things as she
thinks of them and a slave to take Pear Blossom's place,
and Pear Blossom is not to come to her any more, and
you are not to come soon either, because the sight of you
sickens her.'

And Wang Lung promised eagerly and he said:

'Get her what she wills and I do not begrudge anything.'

And he was pleased that he need not see Lotus soon
and until anger was cooled with the fulfilment of her wishes.

There were left yet his three sons, and he was strangely
ashamed before them of what he had done. And he said
to himself again and again :

'Am I not master in my own house and may I not take
my own slave I bought with my silver?'

But he was ashamed, and yet half proud, too, as one
feels himself who is still lusty and a man when others hold
him to be only grandfather. And he waited for his sons
to come into his court.

They came one by one, separately, and the second one
came first. Now this one when he came talked of the land
and of the harvest and of the summer drought which
would this year divide the harvest by three. But Wang *T
Lung considered nothing in these days of rain or drought, *
for if the harvest of the year brought him in a little there
was silver left from the year before and he kept his courts
stuffed with silver and there was money owing to him at

281

50S6, 19.



the grain markets and he had much money let out at high
interest that his second son collected for him, and he looked
no more to see how the skies were over his land.7

But the second son talked on thus, and as he talked
. he looked here and there about the rooms with his eyes
veiled and secret and Wang Lung knew that he looked for
the maid to see if what he had heard was true, and so he
called Pear Blossom from wheje she hid in the bedroom,
and he called out:
t> 'Bring me tea, my child, and tea for my son!'

And she came out, and her delicate pale face was rosy
as a peach and she hung her head and crept about on her
little silent feet, and the second son stared at her as if he
had heard but could not believe until now.

But he said nothing at all except that the land was thus
and so, and this tenant and that must be changed at the
end of the year, and the other one, because he smoked
opium and would not gather from the land what it could
bear. And Wang Lung asked his son how his children
did, and he answered they had the hundred day's cough,
but it was a slight thing now that the weather was warm.

This they talked back and forth, drinking tea, and the
second son took his fill of what he saw and he went away,
and Wang Lung was eased of his second son.

Then the eldest son came in before the same day was
half over and he came in tall and handsome and proud
with the years of his maturity, and Wang Lung was afraid
of his pride, and he did not call out Pear Blossom at firsts
but he waited and smoked his pipe. The eldest son sat there
then stiff with his pride and his dignity and he asked after
the proper manner for his father's health and for his welfare.
Then Wang Lung answered quickly and quietly that he
was well, and as he looked at his son his fear went out i
of him.

For he saw his eldest for what he was: a man big in
body but afraid of his own town wife and more afraid
of not appearing nobly born than of anything. And the
robustness of the land that was strong in Wang Lung even
when he did not know it swelled up in him, and he was I
careless again of this eldest son as he had been before, S

282



and careless of his proper looks, and he called easily of a
sudden to Pear Blossom:

'Come, my child, and pour out tea again for another
son of mine!'

This time she came out very cold and still and her small
oval face was white as the flower of her name. Her eyes
dropped as she came in and she moved stilly and did only
what she was told to do and she went quickly out again.

Now the two men had sat silent while she poured the
tea, but when she was gone and they lifted their bowls,
Wang Lung looked fully into his son's eyes, and he caught
there a naked look of admiration, and it was the look of
one man who envies another man secretly. Then they drank
their tea and the son said at last in a thick, uneven voice :

"I did not believe it was so.'

"Why not?' replied Wang Lung tranquilly. 'It is my
own house.'

The son sighed then and after a time he answered:

'You are rich and you may do as you like.' And he sighed
again and he said, 'Well, I suppose one is not always
enough for any man and there comes a day '

He broke off, but there was in his look the tinge of a
man who envies another man against his will, and Wang
Lung looked and laughed in himself, for well he knew his
eldest son's lusty nature and that not for ever would the
proper town wife he had hold the leash and some day the
man would come forth again.

Then the eldest son said no more but he went his way
as a man does wKc> has had a new thought put into his
head. And Wang Lung sat and smoked his pipe and he was
proud of himself that when he was an old man he had-
done what he wished.

But it was night before the youngest son came in and
he also came alone. Now Wang Lung sat in his middle
room on the court and the red candles were lit on the
table and he sat there smoking, and Pear Blossom sat silently
on the other side of the table from him, and her hands
were folded and quiet in her lap. Sometimes she. looked
at Wang Lung, fully and without coquetry as a child does,
and he watched her and was proud of what he had done.

283



Then suddenly there was his youngest son standing
before him, sprung out of the darkness of the court, and
no one had seen him enter. But he stood there in some
strange crouching way, and without taking thought of it,
Wang Lung was reminded in a flash of memory of a
panther he had once seen the men of the village bring in
from the hills where they had caught it, and the beast
was tied but he crouched for a spring, and his eyes gleamed,
and the lad's eyes gleamed and he fixed them upon his
father's face. And those brows of his that were too heavy
and too black for his youth, he gathered fierce and black
above his eyes. Thus he stood and at last he said in a low
and surcharged voice:

'Now I will go for a soldier — I will go for a soldier '

But he did not look at the girl, only at his father, and
Wang Lung, who had not been afraid at all of his eldest
son and his second son, was suddenly afraid of this one,
whom he had scarcely considered from his birth up.

And Wang Lung stammered and muttered, and would
have spoken, but when he took his pipe from his mouth,
no sound came, and he stared at his son. And his son re-
peated again and again:

'Now I will go — now I will go '

Suddenly he turned and looked at the girl once, and
she looked back at him, shrinking, and she took her two
hands and put them over her face so that she could not
see him. Then the young man tore his eyes from her and
he went in a leap from the room and Wang Lung looked
out into the square of darkness of the door, open into the
black summer night, and he was gone and there was silence
everywhere.

At last he turned to the girl and he said humbly and
gently and with a great sadness and all his pride gone:

'I am too old for you, my heart, and well I know it.
I am an old, old man.'

But the girl dropped her hands from her face and she
cried more passionately than he had ever heard her cry:

'Young men are so cruel — I like old men best!'

When the morning came of the next day Wang Lung's
youngest son was gone and where he was gone no one knew.

284



XXXIV



THEN, AS AUTUMN FLARES WITH THE FALSE HEAT OF ]
summer before it dies into the winter, so was it with the
quick love Wang Lung had for Pear Blossom. The brief
heat of it passed and passion died out of him; he was
fond of her, but passionless.

With the passing of the flame out of him he was suddenly
cold with age and he was an old man. Nevertheless, he I
was fond of her, and it was a comfort to him that she was
in his court and she served him faithfully and with a pa-
tience beyond her year's, and he was always kind to her
with a perfect kindness, and more and more his love for i
her was the love of father for daughter.

And for his sake she was even kind to his poor fool
and this was comfort to him, so that one day he told her
what had long been in his mind. Now Wang Lung had
thought many times of what would come of his poor
fool when he was dead and there was not another one ex-
cept himself who cared whether she lived or starved, and
so he had bought a little bundle of white poisonous stuff
at the medicine shop, and he had said to himself that he
would give it to his fool to eat when he saw his own death
was near. But still he dreaded this more than the hour
of his own death, and it was a comfort to him now when
he saw that Pear Blossom was faithful.

So he called her to him one day and he said :

'There is none other but you to whom I can leave this
poor fool of mine when I am gone, and she will live on
and on after me, seeing that her mind has no troubles of
its own, and she has nothing to kill her and no trouble
to worry her. And well I know that when I am gone no
one will trouble to feed her or to bring her out of the rain
and the cold of winter nor to set her in the summer sun,
and she will be sent out to wander on the street, perhaps
— this poor thing who has had care all her life from her
mother and from me. Now here is a gate of safety for
her in this packet, and when I die, after I am dead, you



285



are to mix it in her rice and let her eat it, that she may
follow me where I am. And so shall I be at ease.'

But Pear Blossom shrank from the thing he held in his
hand and she said in her soft way:

'I can scarcely kill an insect and how could I take this
life? No, my lord, but I will take this poor fool for mine
because you have been kind to me — kinder than any in
all my life, and the only kind one.'

And Wang Lung could have wept for what she said,
because not one had ever requited him like this, and his
heart clung to her and he said:

'Nevertheless, take it, my child, for there is none I
trust as I do you, but even you must die one day — although
I cannot say the words — and after you there is none — no,
not one — and well I know my sons' wives -are too busy
with their children and their quarrels and my sons are men
and cannot think of such things.'

So when she saw his meaning, Pear Blossom took the
packet from him and said no more and Wang Lung trusted
her and was comforted for the fate of his poor fool.

Then Wang Lung withdrew more and more into his
age and he lived much alone except for these two in his
courts, his poor fool and Pear Blossom. Sometimes he
roused himself a little and he looked at Pear Blossom and
he was troubled and said:

'It is too quiet a life for you, my child.'

But she always answered gently and in great gratitude:

'It is quiet and safe.'

And sometimes he said again:

'1 am too old for you, and my fires are ashes.'

But she always answered with a great thankfulness:

'You are kind to me and more I do not desire of any
man.'

Once when she said this Wang Lung was curious and
he asked her:

'What was it in your tender years that made you thus
fearful of men?'

And looking at her for answer he saw a great terror
in her eyes and she covered them with her hands and she
whispered :

286



'Every man I hate except you — I have hated every man,
even my father who sold me. I have heard only evil of
them and I hate them all.'

And he said wondering:

'Now I should have said you had lived quietly and
easily in my courts.'

'I am filled with loathing,' she said, looking away. 'I
am filled with loathing and I hate them all. I hate all
young men.'

And she would say nothing more, and he mused on it,
and he did not know whether Lotus had filled her with
tales of her life and threatened her, or w whether Cuckoo
had frightened her with lewdness, or whether something
had befallen her secretly that she would not tell him, or
what it was.

But he sighed and gave over his questions, because
above everything now he would have peace, and he wished
only to sit in his court near these two.

So Wang Lung sat, and so his age came on him day
by day and year by year, and he slept fitfully in the sun
as his father had done, and he said to himself that his life
was done and he was satisfied with it.

Sometimes, but seldom, he went into other courts, and
sometimes, but more seldom, he saw Lotus, and she never
mentioned the maid he had taken, but she greeted him
well enough, for she was old too and satisfied with the
food and the wine she loved and with the silver she had
for the asking. She and Cuckoo sat together now after
these many years as friends and no longer as mistress and
servant, and they talked of this and that, and most^of all
of the old days with men and they whispered together of
things they would speak aloud, and they ate and drank
and slept, and woke to gossip again before eating and
drinking.

And when Wang Lung went, and it was very seldom,?
into his sons' courts they treated him courteously and they
ran to get tea for him and he asked to see the last child
and he asked many times, for he forgot easily :

'How many grandchildren have I now?'

And one answered him readily:

287



'Eleven sons and eight daughters have your sons to-
gether.'

And he, chuckling and laughing, said back:

'Add two each year, and I know the number, is it so?'

Then he would sit a little while and look at the children
gathering around him to. stare. His grandsons were tall
lads now, and he looked at them, peering at them to see
what they were, and he muttered to himself:

'Now that one has the look of his great-grandfather
and there is a small merchant Liu, and here is myself
when young.'

And he asked them:

c Do you go to school?'

'Yes, grandfather,' they answered in a scattered chorus,
and he said again:
. c Do you study the Four Books?'

Then they laughed with clear young scorn at a man so
old as this and they said:

'No grandfather, and no one studies the Four Books
since the Revolution.'

And he answered, musing:

'Ah, I have heard of a revolution, but I have been too
busy in my life to attend to it. There was always the land.'

But the lads snickered at this, and at last Wang Lung
[ rose, feeling himself after all but a guest in his sons'
courts.

Then after a time he went no more to see his sons,
but sometimes he would ask Cuckoo:

'And are my two daughters-in-law at peace after all these
years?'

And Cuckoo spat upon the ground and she said:
'Those? They are at peace like two cats eyeing each
other. But the eldest son wearies of his wife's complaints
of this and that — too proper a woman for a man, she is,
and always talking of what they did in the house of her
father, and she wearies a man. There is talk of his taking
another. He goes often to the tea-shops.'
'Ah!' said Wang Lung.

But when he would have thought of it his interest in
the matter waned and before he knew it he was thinking

288



of his tea and that the young spring wind smote cold upon
his shoulders.

And another time he said to Cuckoo :

'Does any ever hear from that youngest son of mine
where he is gone this long time?'

And Cuckoo answered, for there was nothing she did
not know in these courts:

'Well, and he does not write a letter, but now and then
one comes from the south and it is said he is a military
official and great enough in a thing they call a revolution
there, but what it is I dq not know — perhaps some sort
of business/

And again Wang Lung said, ' Ah!'

And he would have thought of it, but the evening was
falling and his bones ached in the air left raw and chill
when the sun withdrew. For his mind now went where it
would and he could not hold it long to any one thing.
And the needs of his old body for food and for hot tea
were more keen than for anything. But at night when he
was cold, Pear Blossom lay warm and young against him
and he was comforted in his age with her warmth in his bed.

Thus spring wore on again and again, and vaguely and
more vaguely as these years passed he felt it coming. But
still one thing remained to him and it was his love for his
land. He had gone away from it, and he had set up his
house in a town, and he was rich. But his roots were in
his land and although he forgot if for many months to-
gether, when spring came each year he must go out on to
the land; and now although he could no longer hold a
plough or do anything but see another drive the plough
through the earth, still he must needs go, and he went.
Sometimes he took a servant and his bed and he slept
again in the olcj earthen house and in the old bed where
he had begotten children and where O-lan had died. When
he woke in the dawn he went out and with his trembling
hands he reached and plucked a bit of budding willow and
a spray of peach bloom and held them all day in his hand.

Thus he wandered one day in a late spring, near summer,
and he went over his fields a little way and he came to the
enclosed place upon a low hill where he had buried his

289



dead. He stood trembling on his staff and he looked at the
graves and he remembered them every one. They were
more clear to him now than the sons who lived in his own
house, more clear to him than any one except his poor fool
and except Pear Blossom. And his mind went back many
years and he saw it all clearly, even his little second daughter
of whom he had heard nothing for longer than he could
remember, and he saw her a pretty maid as she had been in
his house, her lips as thin and red as a shred of silk — and
she was to him like these who lay here in the land. Then
he mused and he thought suddenly:
'Well, and I shall be the next.'

Then he went into the enclosure and he looked carefully
and he saw the place where he would lie — below his father
and his uncle and above Ching and not far from O-lan.
And he stared at the bit of earth' where he was to lie and
he saw himself in it and back in his own land for ever.
And he muttered :

C I must see to the coffin.'

This thought he held fast and painfully in his mind, and
he went back to the town and he sent for his eldest son,
and he said:

'There is something I have to say.'

'Then say on,' answered the son, 'I am here.'

But when Wang Lung would have spoken he suddenly
could not remember what it was that he wished to say, and
the tears stood in his eyes because he had held the matter
so painfully in his mind and'now it had slipped wilfully
away from him. So he called Pear Blossom and he said to
her:

'Child, what was it I wanted to say?'
And Pear Blossom answered gently:
'Where were you this day?'

'I was upon the land,' Wang Lung replied, waiting, his
eyes fixed on her face.

And she asked gently again:
'On what piece of land?'

Then suddenly the thing flew into his mind again and
he cried, laughing out of his wet eyes :

'Well, and I do remember. My son, I have chosen my

290

-



place in the earth, and it is below my father and his brother
and above your mother and next to Ching, and I would see
my coffin before I die.'

Then Wang Lung's eldest son cried out dutifully and
properly:

'Do not say that word, my father, but I will do as you
say.'

Then his son bought a carven coffin hewn from a great
log of fragrant wood which is used to bury the dead in and
for nothing else, because that wood is as lasting as iron,
and more lasting than human bones, and Wang Lung was
comforted.

And he had the coffin brought into his room and. he

looked at it every day.

Then all of sudden he thought of something and he said :
'Well, and I would have it moved out to the earthen

house and there I will live out my few days and there I

will die.'

And when they saw how he had set his heart they did
what he wished, and he went back to the house on his
land, he and Pear Blossom and the fool, and what servants
they needed; and Wang Lung took up his abode again on
his land, and he left the house in the town to the family
he had founded.

Spring passed and summer passed into harvest and in
the hot autumn sun before winter comes Wang Lung sat
where his father had sat against the wall. And he thought
no more about anything now except his food and his drink
and his land. But of his land he thought no more what-
harvest it would bring or what seed would be planted or of
anything except of the land itself, and he stooped sometimes
and gathered some of the earth up in his hand and he sat
thus and held it in his hand, and it seemed full of life be-
tween his fingers. And he was content, holding it thus, and i
he thought of it fitfully and of his good coffin that was there :
and the kind earth waited without haste until he came to it.

His sons were proper enough to him and they came
to him every day or at most once in two days, and they
sent him delicate food fit for his age, but he liked best to



291



have one stir up meal in hot water and sup it as his father
had done.

Sometimes he complained a little of his sons if they
came not every day and he said to Pear Blossom, who was
always near him:

'Well, and what are they so busy about?'

But if Pear Blossom said : 'They are in the prime of life
and now they have many affairs; your eldest son has been
made an officer in the town among the rich men, and he
has a new wife, and your second son is setting up a great
grain market for himself,' Wang Lung listened to her, but
he could not comprehend all this and he forgot it as soon
as he looked out over his land.

But one day he saw clearly for a little while. It was a
day on which his two sons had come and after they had
greeted him courteously they went out and they walked
about the house on to the land. Now Wang Lung followed
them silently, and they stood, and he came up to them
slowly, and they did not hear the sound of his footsteps
nor the sound of his staff on the soft earth, and Wang
Lung heard his second son say in his mincing voice :

'This field we will sell and this one, and we will divide
the money between us evenly. Your share I will borrow
at good interest, for now with the rail-road straight through
I can ship rice to the sea and I . . .'

But the old man heard only these words, "sell the land,"
and he cried out and he could not keep his voice from break-
ing and trembling with his anger :

'Now, evil, idle sons — sell the land?' — he choked and
would have fallen, and they caught him and held him up,
and he began to weep.

Then they soothed him and they said, soothing him:

'No — no — we will never sell the land '

'It is the end of a family — when they begin to sell the
land,' he said brokenly.' 'Out of the land we came and into
it we must go — and if you will hold your land you can
live — no one can rob you of land '

And the old man let his scanty tears dry upon his cheeks
and they made salty stains there. And he stooped and took



292



up a handful of the soil and he held it and he muttered:
'If you sell the land, it is the end.'

And his two sons held him, one on either side, each
holding his arm, and he held tight in his hand the warm
loose earth. And they soothed him and they said over and
over, the elder son and the second son:

'Rest assured, our father, rest assured. The land is not
to be sold.'

But over the old man's head they looked at each other
and smiled.



THE END



THIS EDITION IS COMPOSED IN A NEW
VERSION OF A FRENCH SEVENTEENTH
CENTURY TYPE AND PRINTED AND MADE
BY ARNOLDO MONDADORI IN VERONA




THE
ALBATROSS
MODERN CONTINENTAL LIBRARV

AAVWW

REBECCA

by

Daphne du Maurier

The young and inexperienced girl who tells
her story in Daphne du Maimer's novel is
wooed at Monte Carlo by a man much
older than herself who smoulders with an
unhappiness she cannot fathom. He brings
her back a bride to his historic home on
the wild west coast and here she comes
up against the shadow of his first wife,
Rebecca, drowned a year before. Memories
of Rebecca pursue her everywhere; even
the servants and in particular the sinister
housekeeper, Mrs. Danvers, are on Rebec-
ca's side, and although no actual ghost
walks abroad at Manderley, the passions
of the people in the house are so violent
and the electricity of the atmosphere so tense
that the girl's struggle with the nameless
influences round her, culminating in the
disclosure of Manderley's surprising secret,
is as exciting as any ghost-story.



ALBATROSS LIBRARY • VOLUME 5355



THE
ALBATROSS
MODERN CONTINENTAL LIBRARY

/VWVWl

WHITEOAKS

by

Mazo de la Roche

Living as few people live in modern fiction,
the forceful, eccentric Whiteoaks are as
typical of their time and place as John
Galsworthy's Forsytes. Each member of this
tempestuous Canadian family is a sharply
defined individual in whose problems - so
like the problems of each one of us - the
reader cannot fail to be interested. "More
like real life", writes Glemence Dand, "than
any book has the right te be." Here is the
common round of births, marriages and
deaths with all their human implications -
here are the studies of young and old, of the
shyness and misery of eighteen year old
Finch, of Eden's ill-starred marriage and of
the inevitable passing of the older genera-
tion in the person of grandmother Whiteoak
who plays such an important part in the
history of the family. This novel, though it
forms part of the chronicle which includes
Jalna, Young Renny and Finch's For-
tune, is a work complete in itself which will
certainly whet the appetite for more.